OK,
LET&apos;S GET GOING.
WELCOME TO THE NOVEMBER 15TH,
TWENTY TWENTY TWO REGULAR
MEETING OF THE PLANNING
COMMISSION FOR DETAILED
INFORMATION AND READING
PROCEDURES, PLEASE REVIEW THE
FULL PRINTED AGENDA.
MR. LEONHARDT, WHERE CALL THE
ROLL COMMISSIONER GIVE RANDALL
PRESENT COMMISSIONER ABRAMS
HERE COMMISSIONER SAUVé HERE.
COMMISSIONER MILLS HERE.
MR. HAMMERSCHMIDT HERE.
COMMISSIONER DISH HERE,
COMMISSIONER HERE.
COMMISSIONER CLARK.
YEAH.
COMMISSIONER WEISS HERE.
THE GANG&apos;S ALL BACK TOGETHER.
ALL RIGHT.
MAY I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE AGENDA?
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER LEE SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER MILLS ANY
DISCUSSION?
&gt;&gt; NONE.
ALL RIGHT.
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR PCI I MOTION
PASSES ALL READY MINUTES OF THE
PREVIOUS MEETING.
CAN I HAVE A MOTION TO REVIEW
THE MINUTES OF THE SEPTEMBER
20TH 2022 MEETING?
COMMISSIONER MILLS SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER DYS ALL IN FAVOR
PLEASE SAY MOTION PASSES.
OK, LET&apos;S SEE.
WE ARE ON TO REPORTS FROM CITY
ADMINISTRATION, CITY COUNCIL
PLANNING MANAGER AND THE LIKE
COMMISSIONER OR COUNCIL MEMBER
JOSH YES IT IS MY PLEASURE TO
TELL YOU THAT T ONE ON STATE
EVEN NORTH MAPLE PASSED SECOND
READING THE NORTH MAPLE VILLAGE
ANNEXATION WAS APPROVED.
I WAS TRYING TO GET THEM TO
APPROVE THE SITE PLAN AS WELL
BUT THAT WAS NOT ON THE AGENDA.
THE PROPOSED PLAN DISTRIBUTION
HAS BEEN APPROVED AND I DON&apos;T
KNOW IF YOU&apos;RE INTERESTED IN
THIS BUT TWO EXPLORATORY
RESOLUTIONS REGARDING DOWNTOWN
TOWN LAND USE WERE PASSED
EXPLORATORY RESOLUTIONS ONE
EXPLORING THE FEASIBILITY
OF PUBLIC RESTROOMS IN DOWNTOWN
AND THE OTHER EXPLORING THE
FEASIBILITY AND SUSTAINABILITY
OF ACTIVATING THE LIBRARY LIGHT
WITH FOOD TRUCKS AND BOTH
OF THOSE WERE PASSED.
AND DID I LEAVE ANYTHING, MR.
LEONARD?
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M SORRY NO REPORT FROM THE
PLANNING MANAGER THIS EVENING
AND NO REPORT FOR YOU EITHER.
&gt;&gt; OK ALREADY?
YEAH AND OUR DISH
COVERED EVERYTHING IS ALREADY
OK.
&gt;&gt; ANY OTHER COMMISSION MEMBERS
HAVE ANYTHING TO REPORT
LIAISON&apos;S THINGS LIKE THAT
ALREADY WE WILL MOVE ON TO ITEM
NUMBER SIX WHICH IS PUBLIC
COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PERSONS TO SPEAK UP TO THREE
MINUTES ABOUT AN ISSUE THAT IS
NOT PRESENTED ARE NOT LISTED ON
THE PUBLIC HEARING.
THIS AGENDA WILL CALL ON
INDIVIDUALS PRESENT TO HEAR THE
TO ADDRESS THE COMMISSION AND
THEN REMOTE PARTICIPANTS TO
SPEAK DURING THE PUBLIC HEARING
PRESS NINE IF LISTENING BY
PHONE OR USE THE RAISED HAND
FEATURE IF YOU&apos;RE VIEWING
THROUGH THE WEBLINK LET&apos;S SEE
FOR PHONE ACCESS CALL EIGHT
SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE
FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN AND EIGHT
ARE MEETING ID NINE SEVEN SEVEN
SIX SIX THREE FOUR ONE TWO TWO
SIX TO UNMUTED CRESTAR SIX CITY
STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS THAT
HAVE RAISE YOUR HAND USING THE
LAST THREE DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE
NUMBER OR BY NAME IF AVAILABLE
FOR THOSE ACCESSING THE WEB
LINK YOU&apos;LL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT THE HOST IS
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK WHEN
SPEAKING PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET
AREA AND MUTE ANY TELEVISION
BACKGROUND SOUND SO THAT WE MAY
HEAR YOU CLEARLY FOR EITHER
METHOD OF PARTICIPATION.
AND PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK ON
SOMETHING THAT IS NOT ON THE
AGENDA TONIGHT ALREADY ANYBODY
WHO IS WAITING REMOTELY WE DO
ADAM JUSZKIEWICZ, WE HAVE THREE
MINUTES TO ADDRESS THE PLANNING
COMMISSION.
&gt;&gt; HI ADAM DISCOVERED HERE I
MUST FAGERSTROM I DON&apos;T REALLY
HAVE A COMMENT.
I JUST WANT TO MENTION THE ZOOM
SPEED THE PICTURE IS NOT
SHOWING UP.
IT DOES SHOW UP ON THE YOUTUBE
FEED, HOWEVER.
&gt;&gt; SO I JUST WANTED TO LOOK FOR
THAT.
&gt;&gt; NO, THAT&apos;S VERY HELPFUL.
WE WILL PASS THAT TECHNICAL
INFORMATION ALONG.
&gt;&gt; THE AUDIO IS WORKING.
IT&apos;S JUST THE I THINK THE I
THINK THE C10 LIKE THE BLINK
IMAGE OF THE CITY AND IT&apos;S LIKE
FULL SCREEN SO IT&apos;S LIKE NOT
SHOWING UP SO OK.
&gt;&gt; YEAH ALL RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
CALLING IN AND LETTING US KNOW
THAT ALREADY SO WE WILL MOVE ON
NOW TO OUR REGULAR BUSINESS
WHICH IS AND START WITH ITEM
EIGHT A
THIS IS ITEM NUMBER
TWENTY TWO DASH ONE EIGHT SIX
NINE WHICH IS TWO ONE ONE EIGHT
VICTORIOUS CIRCLE ANNEXATIONS
AND ZONING FOR CITY COUNCIL
APPROVAL REQUEST TO ANNEX THIS
POINT FOR A. SINGLE FAMILY
PARCEL INTO THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR FROM ANN ARBOR TOWNSHIP
TO OBTAIN PUBLIC UTILITIES AND
IS ON THE PROPERTY ARE ONE A
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING IN WARD
ONE STAFF RECOMMENDATION IS
APPROVAL.
DO WE HAVE SOME SORT
OF PRESENTATION TONIGHT ON THIS
MR. LEONARD AND JEFF KONCZ WILL
BE JOINING US IN A MOMENT HERE
AND WHILE HE PROVIDES AN
OVERVIEW OF THE PETITION, I&apos;M
GOING TO GO SEE IF I CAN SEE
WHAT THE STATUS OF OUR FITTY
VIDEO FEED IS.
THANK YOU.
I CAN GIVE A BRIEF
PRESENTATION.
I CAN TELL YOU WHAT I&apos;M SEEING
NOW IS JUST AN IMAGE OF MYSELF
AND AN IMAGE OF BRANT BUT WE
CAN&apos;T SEE ANYBODY ELSE WHICH IS
AN IMPROVEMENT OF WHAT WE WERE
LOOKING AT JUST A MINUTE OR TWO
AGO WHICH IS JUST A BLANK
SCREEN.
SO BACK TO TWENTY TWENTY ONE
EIGHTEEN VICTORIOUS CIRCLE
PRETTY STRAIGHTFORWARD
ANNEXATION ZONING IN ANN ARBOR
TOWNSHIP JUST WEST OF NEWPORT,
RHODE ISLAND.
VICTORIA CIRCLE THE PETITIONER
WOULD LIKE TO ANNEX INTO THE
CITY MAIN HARBOR TO ACCESS CITY
WATER AND SEWER SERVICES THE
SAY A LITTLE LESS THAN FOUR
ACRES CONSISTENT WITH THE LONG
RANGE LAND USE PLANS AND STAFF
IS RECOMMENDING APPROVAL.
OK, THANK YOU ALREADY.
SO WE WILL MOVE ON TO THE
PUBLIC HEARING.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PURPOSES UP TO THREE MINUTES
ABOUT THIS ANNEXATION.
WELL FIRST CALL AN INDIVIDUALS
PRESENT TO ADDRESS THE
COMMISSION, THEN REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK PLEASE
PRESS STAR NINE IF LISTENING BY
PHONE OR USE TO RAISE THE HAND
FEATURE YOU THE WEBLINK PHONE
ACCESS IS EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN
EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO FOUR
SEVEN AND MEETING IDS IS NINE
SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX THREE FOUR
ONE TWO TWO SIX.
CITY STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS
THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR HAND
USING THREE DIGITS OF YOUR
PHONE NUMBER OR BY NAME IF
AVAILABLE THROUGH ACCESSING
THROUGH THE WEB LINK YOU&apos;LL
HEAR AN AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT
THE HOST IS ALLOWING YOU TO
SPEAK FOR EITHER METHOD PLEASE
STATE YOUR NAME AND ADDRESS AT
THE BEGINNING OF THE COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT THAT
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK ON THIS
ANNEXATION?
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
IT LOOKS LIKE NOBODY IS THERE
ANYBODY REMOTE THAT WOULD LIKE
TO SPEAK ON THIS?
NOPE.
OK, I WILL READ THE MOTION THEN
.
AND ANOTHER SITTING PLANNING
COMMISSION HEREBY RECOMMENDS
THAT THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
APPROVE THE ANNEXATION AND R
ONE A SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING
DISTRICT ZONING OF TWO ONE ONE
EIGHT VICTORIOUS CIRCLE MOVED
BY COMMISSIONER SO THEY
SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER LEE
ANY DISCUSSION?
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER, I HAVE ONE
QUESTION AND I.
I JUST IT&apos;S POSSIBLE I&apos;M
MISREADING SOMETHING BUT DOES
IT SAY IN THE ZONING REGS THAT
YOU EXCERPTED FOR THIS IN THE
REPORT THAT 20000 SQUARE FEET
MINIMUM IS REQUIRED FOR THIS
ZONING DESIGNATION AND THIS
PROJECT IS 17000 163 SQUARE
FEET.
YES, BUT THE SITE WOULD BE
CONSIDERED EXISTING CONFORMING
WHICH WOULD ALLOW THEM TO
CONSTRUCT A HOME BUT IT WOULD
BE NOT CONFORMING WITH REGARD
TO LOT SIZE.
WE SEE THIS THROUGHOUT THE CITY
BEING A NINETEENTH CENTURY CITY
WE WE SEE NEIGHBORHOODS THAT
MIGHT HAVE A SINGLE ZONING
DISTRICT BUT YOU KNOW, NUMEROUS
LOTS MAYBE NOT CONFORMING WITH
REGARD TO THE MINIMUM LOT SIZE
.
&gt;&gt; SO THAT&apos;S A BIG CATCH AND WE
WOULD CONSIDER IT TO BE AN
EXISTING NON CONFORMING
CONDITION AND WOULD ALLOW A
SINGLE FAMILY HOME TO BE BUILT
.
THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S GREAT.
I MEAN WE ARE NOT A FAN
OF LARGE MINIMUM LOT SIZES SO I
THINK THAT&apos;S COMPLETELY
REASONABLE.
I WANTED TO ASK ABOUT THE
PUBLIC STORM SEWER.
YOU MENTIONED THAT WATER AND
SANITARY SEWER SERVICES ARE
AVAILABLE THOUGH THE SANITARY
HOOKUP IS PROBABLY GOING TO BE
EXPENSIVE AND KIND OF A DESIGN
CHALLENGE.
BUT I WONDERED WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN PUBLIC STORM SEWERS NOT
AVAILABLE?
DO THEY HAVE TO DO ALTERNATIVES
WITH DRAINAGE OR DETENTION AND
RETENTION OR RIGHT.
THEY&apos;RE NOT CURRENTLY REQUIRED
TO PROVIDE DETENTION SO TO
SPEAK.
VICTORIA CIRCLE IS A DIRT ROAD
THAT HAS BEEN IN THE TOWNSHIP
FOR DECADES AND OVER TIME THE
CITY PUBLIC SERVICES GROUP
IMPROVES ROADS AND PROVIDES
SERVICES SUCH AS SUCH AS
STORMWATER.
MY GUESS IS THAT STORMWATER MAY
EVENTUALLY BE PROVIDED TO
STREETS LIKE VICTORIA CIRCLE
OVER TIME BUT IT WILL IT WILL
TAKE A WHILE TO GET THERE.
SO ARE OUR ENGINEERS TYPICALLY
WILL INDICATE WHETHER STORM
SEWER IS AVAILABLE OR WHETHER
IT&apos;S NOT AVAILABLE JUST AS A
MATTER OF PUBLIC RECORD WE
DON&apos;T REQUIRE IN THIS CASE A
PETITIONER TO CONNECT TO TO THE
STORM.
THE CITY STORM CAME BECAUSE IT
DOESN&apos;T EXIST BUT IT&apos;S SOMETIME
IN THE FUTURE IF IT IF STORMS
IF STORM DRAINS WERE TO BE
CONSTRUCTED IN VICTORIA CIRCLE
THEY WOULD TRY TO TO
ACCOMMODATE STORMWATER FROM
FROM EACH OF EACH OF THE
PROPERTY OWNERS.
&gt;&gt; OK, THERE&apos;S NO CONCERN ABOUT
FLOODING.
OH NO.
I KNOW THIS IS A FAIRLY SCOPI
PART OF TOWN JUST IMMEDIATELY
TO THE NORTH IS RIVERWOOD AND
SO SO STORMWATER WOULD BE
FLOWING TOWARD THE NORTH FROM
THIS PROPERTY.
THERE ARE THERE ARE ACTUALLY
STORMWATER DETENTION PONDS JUST
JUST TO THE NORTH JUST TO THE
WEST IS IT IS IT IS RIVERWOOD
NEWPORT CREEK IS TO THE NORTH
AND THEY ALSO HAVE STORMWATER
SYSTEM ESTABLISHED.
SO I HAVE NOT HEARD OF ANY
STORMWATER PROBLEMS IN PART
BECAUSE IT&apos;S A FAIRLY A FAIRLY
SLOPPY NEIGHBORHOOD WHERE WATER
TENDS TO NOT STAND VERY, VERY
LONG IN ANY ONE SPOT.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT.
SORRY.
EXCUSE ME.
SO I DON&apos;T HAVE THE DIMENSIONAL
TABLE TOTALLY MEMORIZED SO I&apos;M
LOOKING AT IT NOW.
I&apos;M JUST CURIOUS, YOU KNOW, WHY
NOT ZONE IT OUT TO A ARE THE
REASON SOMETHING THAT COULD
ALLOW MORE THAN ONE NEED IT.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
YEAH.
THE REASON THAT WE ARE
SUPPORTING THE ERWINAZE IS
BECAUSE THAT&apos;S CONSISTENT WITH
ALL THE OTHER LOTS THAT HAVE
ALREADY BEEN ANNEXED ALONG
VICTORIA CIRCLE WHICH ARE OR
HAVE BEEN ZONED OR WHEN A SO I
THINK THAT IS A REALLY GOOD
QUESTION THAT LENDS ITSELF TO A
MAYBE A MUCH LARGER STORY OR A
MUCH LARGER ISSUE WHICH IS YOU
KNOW, ARE WE OK WITH OUR WANT A
MINIMUM SIZE IT&apos;S SHOULD WE
CONSIDER DROPPING TO SOMETHING
LESS THAN THAT LIKE TEN
THOUSAND SQUARE FEET?
I THINK THAT&apos;S A THAT&apos;S A
REALLY GREAT QUESTION.
I WOULD SAY INSTEAD OF FOCUSING
ON ONE LOT THAT WOULD CREATE
SORT OF A ZONING SITUATION THEN
I THINK IT&apos;S A REALLY IT WOULD
BE A GREAT UNDERTAKING TO LOOK
AT THIS STATE ISSUE CITY CITY
WIDE LIKE IN THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLANNING PROCESS MAYBE.
EXACTLY, YEAH.
I MEAN TO GIVE US THE MOST
FLEXIBILITY IT WOULD BE NICE TO
BE ABLE NOT EVEN JUST THE LARGE
SIZE TO BE ABLE TO ALLOW TO
BUILD YOU KNOW, MORE THAN ONE
UNIT ON THAT SITE ANY TIME IN
THE FUTURE.
&gt;&gt; SO ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU, SIR.
ANY OTHER DISCUSSION ALREADY?
&gt;&gt; WE READY FOR A VOTE THEN?
I THINK WE CAN PROBABLY DO THIS
AS A GROUP.
SO ALL IN FAVOR?
&gt;&gt; NO, WE HAVE TO DO THIS
SUPPORTING OUR LAND USE
RECOMMENDATION.
&gt;&gt; OK, ALREADY MR LEONARD
COMMISSIONER GIVE RENDELL YES
COMMISSIONER ELSE YES.
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER SILVER YES.
COMMISSIONER EVANS.
YES.
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
YES I KNOW YOU&apos;RE GETTING THERE
COMMISSIONER.
THIS COMMISSIONER YES.
COMMISSIONER CLARK.
&gt;&gt; YES COMMISSIONER.
WHICH YES.
MOTION WHERE YOU GO ON TO THE
NEXT ONE DID WE SKIP THE PUBLIC
HEARINGS NO.7 NO YOU DIDN&apos;T
WORK.
&gt;&gt; WE DID IT SO THERE ARE NO OH
I&apos;M SORRY I DID.
&gt;&gt; I THINK YOU&apos;RE RIGHT.
OK, THANK YOU FOR POINTING IT
OUT.
&gt;&gt; YES.
OF WHAT&apos;S SO WE WILL WE WILL GO
BACK A NOTCH SORRY NO THANK YOU
FOR BRINGING THAT UP.
I APPRECIATE THAT.
PUBLIC HEARINGS FOR NEXT WEEK.
&gt;&gt; THERE ARE NO NEW PUBLIC
HEARINGS SCHEDULED FOR DECEMBER
SIX.
GOT IT.
LET&apos;S SEE.
I KNEW THAT THAT&apos;S WHY I
SKIPPED IT ALREADY.
OK, SO WE ARE ON TO ITEM EIGHT
B THEN WHICH IS TWO TWO DASH
ONE SEVEN SEVEN TWO FIVE TWO OH
AND TWO FIVE FOUR OH PONTIAC
TRAIL ANNEXATION.
THE PETITIONER IS PROPOSING TO
ANNEX TWO PARCELS FROM ANOTHER
TOWNSHIP INTO THE CITY, AN
ARBOR THAT TOTAL FIVE POINT
EIGHT NINE SEVEN ACRES LOCATED
ON THE EAST SIDE OF PONTIAC
TRAIL.
THE PARCELS ARE INTENDED TO BE
ADDED TO THE VILLAGE OF ANN
ARBOR SITE PLAN AND FUTURE.
THE PETITIONER IS INTENDING TO
EVENTUALLY REQUEST R FOR A
MULTIPLE FAMILY ZONING STAFF
RECOMMENDATION IS APPROVAL.
&gt;&gt; DO WE HAVE A PRESENTATION
ON
THIS TONIGHT FROM THE
PETITIONER OR FROM STAFF OR THE
PETITIONERS JOINING US?
&gt;&gt; WE ASSUME TIM LOFLIN
INDICATED THAT HE WOULD JOIN.
WE ASSUME SO MAYBE WE CAN
PROMOTE HIM AS PANELIST IF HE&apos;S
THERE SO HE WILL BE PRESENTING
HE&apos;S JOINING US NOW OK AND THEN
OK, SO HE HE MAY WANT TO GIVE
US A BRIEF PRESENTATION, MR.
LAUFFER AN OFFER AND ANYBODY
FROM YOUR TEAM YOU WOULD LIKE
TO BE PROMOTED?
NO, JUST GOT SOME YOU HAVE UP
TO TEN MINUTES.
THANK YOU.
SO NICE TO SEE YOU ALL EVEN
THOUGH I CAN&apos;T REALLY SEE
ANYBODY BUT JEFF IT&apos;S GOOD TO
SEE YOU ALL AGAIN.
I DON&apos;T HAVE A PRESENTATION
TONIGHT AS YOU ALL KNOW THIS IS
THE LAST TWO PARCELS OF OUR
VILLAGE OF ANN ARBOR
DEVELOPMENT WHICH WILL BE UPON
PIONEER TRAIL AND BOUVARD.
THIS IS THE ONE WE&apos;RE CALLING
WILL DIFFERENTIATE PROPERTY AND
THAT IS AGAIN THE LAST PARCEL
ON PIONEER TRAIL.
I DON&apos;T HAVE ANYTHING TO SHOW
YOU FROM LAST TIME I CAME IN
FRONT OF YOU SIX WEEKS AGO WE
ARE MOVING FORWARD WITH OUR
SITE PLANNED AMENDMENT WHICH
WOULD INCORPORATE THIS PARCEL
AND THE MURPHEY PARCEL TO THE
NORTH OF THIS.
SO HOPEFULLY I&apos;LL HAVE
SOMETHING SUBMITTED THAT WE CAN
SHARE WITH YOU AND FRANKLY I
THINK EVERYBODY SHOULD BE HAPPY
WITH THE RESULTS, ESPECIALLY
WITH THE ADDITIONAL OPEN SPACE
THAT WE&apos;RE GOING TO BE ADDING
TO THE PROJECT.
&gt;&gt; SO I&apos;M HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS BUT AT THIS POINT I
DON&apos;T HAVE ANYTHING ELSE TO
SHARE.
&gt;&gt; SO THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
MR. KHAN, DO YOU HAVE ANYTHING
TO ADD TO THAT OR JUST WANT TO
REITERATE THAT MR LATHAM&apos;S
PROJECT THE VILLAGE BARBER CAME
IN BEFORE YOU YOU YOU HELD TRUE
TO PUBLIC HEARINGS AND ABOUT 67
ACRES QUITE A FEW HUNDRED
RESIDENTIAL UNITS BOTH
OWNER-OCCUPIED AND IN RENTAL.
THE PETITIONER IS ACQUIRING
THESE ADDITIONAL SITES OFF
OF PONTIAC TRAIL WHICH INCLUDE
THE TWO BEFORE YOU TODAY.
TWENTY FIVE TWENTY AND TWENTY
FIVE FORTY PONTIAC TRAIL AND
THEY ALSO ARE ALREADY
PETITIONED TO ANNEX TWENTY SIX
HUNDRED AND THAT WAS
SUCCESSFULLY ANNEXED.
SO AFTER YOUR RECOMMENDATION
TONIGHT WE&apos;LL TAKE THIS
PETITION FOR THESE TWO PARCELS
TO CITY COUNCIL FOR THEIR
APPROVAL OF THE ANNEXATION AND
THEN SEND IT OFF TO THE STATE
FOR THEIR RELEASE BAN AT SOME
POINT IN THE FUTURE.
AS TIM MENTIONED, HE IS
PLANNING ON BRINGING AN AMENDED
SITE PLAN BACK TO YOU WHICH
WILL NOT ONLY INCLUDE THE 67
ACRES THAT YOU&apos;VE ALREADY SEEN
BUT IT&apos;LL INCLUDE IMPROVMENT
BASED ON THE ACQUISITION
OF THESE THREE PARCELS ALONG
PIONEER TRAIL.
SO YOU&apos;RE GOING TO SEE THE
WHOLE ENCHILADA HOPEFULLY
WITHIN WITHIN A FEW MONTHS.
SO THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S WHAT I HAD TO
ADD TO ADD.
&gt;&gt; GREAT THANKS.
OK, WELL LET&apos;S MOVE ON THEN TO
THE PUBLIC HEARING.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PERSONS TO SPEAK UP TO THREE
MINUTES ABOUT THIS ANNEXATION.
WELL, FIRST CALL IN INDIVIDUALS
WHO ARE PRESENT AND THEN REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK DURING A
PUBLIC HEARING RALEIGH PRESS
STAR NINE IF LISTENING BY PHONE
OR USE THE RAISE THE HAND
FEATURE IF YOU ONLY SEE THE
WEBLINK FOR PHONE ACCESS CALL
EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE
THREE FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN AND
AND ARE MEETING ID NINE SEVEN
SEVEN SIX SIX THREE FOUR ONE
TWO TWO SIX.
CITY STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS
THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR HAND
USING THE LAST THREE DIGITS
OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR BY NAME
IF ACCESSING THROUGH WEBLINK
YOU&apos;LL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE HOST IS
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK FOR
EITHER METHOD.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANYBODY PRESENT WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK ON THIS
PETITION
?
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU FOR GIVING.
MY NAME IS KENT ARBER AND I
LIVE THERE.
TWENTY EIGHT ABORIGINAL COURT.
THIS ANNEXATION SHOULD GO
FORWARD.
THIS IS A MASSIVE PROJECT I
DON&apos;T NEED TO REMIND YOU I
THINK THE ORIGINAL PLANS CALL
FOR FIVE HUNDRED AND SIXTY ONE
UNITS AND WILL HAVE A
TREMENDOUS IMPACT CLIMATE
IMPACT ON THE CITY EACH TIME AN
ANNEXATION COMES UP AND I THINK
THIS IS AT LEAST THE FOURTH
TIME I MAKE THE SAME STATEMENT.
MY APOLOGIES FOR THE REPETITION
BUT THIS PROJECT REALLY NEEDS
TO GO ALL ELECTRIC FOR THE
ENTIRE PROJECT.
THE DEVELOPER VERY GRACIOUSLY
CHANGED ITS PLANS, ITS ORIGINAL
PLANS AND HAS AGREED THAT THE
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY SINGLE
FAMILY HOMES ACTUALLY I MIGHT
HAVE IT WRONG ARE TO GO ALL
ELECTRIC BUT THE RENTAL PORTION
WILL REMAIN WITH GAS FURNACES
AND GAS PLANT INDEFINITENESS.
MR LATHAM WAS NICE ENOUGH TO
MEET WITH A GROUP OF CITIZENS
BACK IN LATE SEPTEMBER WE
TALKED ABOUT AT LENGTH I
REALIZE THIS IS UNUSUAL FOR
ROBERTSON BROTHERS TO DO THIS.
IT RAISES SOME UNCERTAINTIES
FOR THE COMPANY BUT IT REALLY
MAKES NO SENSE AT THIS POINT IN
THE CLIMATE CRISIS TO GO
FORWARD WITH GAS AND NEW
CONSTRUCTION AND I&apos;M PRETTY
CONFIDENT THAT ROBERTSON
BROTHERS CAN FIND A WAY TO DO
THIS AND STILL MAINTAIN THE
ECONOMIC VIABILITY OF THE
PROJECT.
SO AGAIN, MY APOLOGIES FOR
PREDICTABILITY AND REPETITION
BUT SINCE I&apos;VE GOT MR LAFFONT
ON THE LINE, I JUST THOUGHT I&apos;D
REITERATE THAT THIS IS NOT JUST
MY CONCERN BUT PRETTY MUCH THE
CONCERNS OF THE ENTIRE CLIMATE
ACTION COMMUNITY IN ANN ARBOR.
SO I SUPPORT THIS PROJECT.
I THINK WE ALL DO.
WE WANT TO SEE IT MOVING
FORWARD MOVE FORWARD.
THAT CITY NEEDS MORE HOUSING.
IT&apos;S A GOOD DEVELOPER.
I JUST NEED YOU TO TAKE THIS
ONE ADDITIONAL STEP SO WE LOOK
FORWARD TO HEARING THAT WHEN IT
COMES BACK WHEN THE AMENDED
TYPE PLAN COMES BACK TO
PLANNING COMMISSION.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
IS THERE ANYBODY ELSE PRESENT I
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK ON THIS
PETITION FOR IS THERE ANYBODY
IN THE QUEUE REMOTELY MR
LEONARD?
THERE&apos;S NOT OK SO I WILL READ
THE MOTION WHICH IS THIS AND
THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
HEREBY RECOMMENDS THAT THE
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL APPROVE
THE ANNEXATION OF TWO FIVE TWO
OH PONTIAC TRAIL AND TWO FIVE
FOUR OH PONTIAC TRAIL MOVED BY
COMMISSIONER MILLS SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER DISH AND
DISCUSSION
COMMISSIONER DISH IS
IT OK IF I ASK A QUESTION OF MR
LOVGREN?
I&apos;M ALLOWED TO DO THAT.
I WOULD THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; OH YEAH OK.
I JUST WANTED TO KNOW I THOUGHT
IT WAS I THOUGHT IT WAS GREAT
THAT MR BUT MR DAVOR AND THAT
YOU MET AT MR GARBER&apos;S REQUEST
YOU MET WITH A NUMBER
OF CONCERNED RESIDENTS ABOUT
THIS THIS DEVELOPMENT AND YOU
TALKED MORE ABOUT WHAT YOUR
CONCERNS WERE ABOUT MAKING AN
ALL ELECTRIC DEVELOPMENT AND I
WONDERED IF YOU WOULD BE
WILLING TO SHARE SOME OF THE
REASONS THAT YOU PRESENTED AT
THAT MEETING.
IT WAS REALLY I MEAN BASICALLY
THE SAME AS WHAT WE DISCUSSED
BEFORE AND THE LAST PLANNING
COMMISSION MEETING JUST BROKE
UP.
YOU KNOW, FROM AN ECONOMIC
STANDPOINT I WILL SAY YOU DID A
LOT OUT OF THAT MEETING.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M I&apos;M VERY GLAD WE DID
THAT.
THERE&apos;S BEEN SOME FOLLOW UP
MEETINGS.
IN FACT, WE&apos;VE SENT A COUPLE
OF OUR EXECUTIVES ACTUALLY FLEW
OUT TO ARIZONA FOR FOR A
SEMINAR SPECIFICALLY FOR THESE
TYPES DISCUSSIONS.
SO I THINK WE&apos;VE LEARNED A LOT
THIS IS STILL OUR POSITION.
&gt;&gt; YOU KNOW, HOPEFULLY THAT
THAT&apos;S RESPECTED.
WE HAVE COME A LONG WAY BUT AT
THIS POINT WE&apos;RE WE&apos;RE
BASICALLY THE SAME AS WHAT WE
TOLD YOU BEFORE.
HOWEVER, I WILL SAY AFTER
MEETING MR GARBAREK HIS TEAM,
WE&apos;RE CERTAINLY WILLING TO
CONTINUE TO HAVE THE
CONVERSATION OPEN SO THERE
MIGHT BE OTHER WAYS TO MEET
SOME OF THE GOALS AT THAT.
WE&apos;RE STILL EXPLORING HOPEFULLY
THAT I HOPE THAT ANSWERS YOUR
QUESTION COMPLETELY OR THE
ANSWER YOU WANTED.
&gt;&gt; WE ARE KEEPING AN OPEN LINE
.
NO, I WAS JUST LOOKING FOR IF
YOU HAD IF THERE WAS ANYTHING
ELSE BESIDES THE I UNDERSTOOD
THAT YOUR ECONOMIC CONCERNS
EXCUSE ME WERE THAT IT WILL IT
COULD MAKE YOU LESS COMPETITIVE
ON THE RENTAL MARKET FOR THE
RENTAL HOUSING AND I DO
APPRECIATE THAT YOU ARE
RECLAIMING A SITE THAT HAS SAT
EMPTY FOR A REALLY LONG TIME
AND THAT HAS A LANDFILL ON IT.
THAT&apos;S LEAKING METHANE WHICH
ISN&apos;T VERY FAR FROM MY HOUSE.
SO I&apos;M PLEASED THAT THAT WILL
BE DIFFERENT AND I I UNDERSTAND
THAT THERE ARE A LOT OF FACTORS
IN PLAY HERE.
I WISH THAT THIS OUTCOME COULD
BE DIFFERENT BUT I DO
UNDERSTAND THAT WE&apos;RE IN A
PERIOD OF TRANSITION AND I AM
GRATEFUL FOR FOR HOW FAR YOU
HAVE COME WITH SINGLE FAMILY
HOMES AND AS I SAY, I WISH THAT
IT COULD GO FURTHER BUT I DID
WANT TO EXPRESS I SEE A LOT
OF PUBLIC BENEFITS.
THERE&apos;S ALSO A LOT OF PARK THAT
YOU&apos;RE CREATING HERE AND YOU&apos;RE
TAKING SOME PRESSURE OFF OF A
ROAD THAT LEADS TO A VERY
POPULAR RECREATIONAL AMENITY.
SO A PRIVATE ROAD THAT LEADS TO
A POPULAR RECREATIONAL AMENITY.
&gt;&gt; SO THERE ARE MANY WAYS IN
WHICH THIS PROJECT CAN IMPROVE
THE NEIGHBORHOOD AND OF COURSE
WE ALL LOOK FORWARD TO THE
POSSIBILITY OF A ROUNDABOUT IF
THE FEDERAL MONEY COMES THROUGH
FOR THAT.
&gt;&gt; SO
I KNOW THAT YOU&apos;VE REALLY
TRIED TO OFFER WHAT YOU COULD
TO OFFSET WHAT YOU FEEL YOU
CAN&apos;T OFFER.
&gt;&gt; AND SO I WOULD THANK YOU FOR
THAT.
I APPRECIATE THOSE THOSE WORDS.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
ANY THE DISCUSSION ALL ALREADY.
LET&apos;S GET ON WITH THE ROLL CALL
VOTE THEN COMMISSIONER.
GIVE BRENDEL YES.
COMMISSIONER MILLS.
YES.
COMMISSIONER SAUVé YES
COMMISSIONER APRON&apos;S YES
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT YES.
COMMISSIONER DISH YES.
COMMISSIONER LEIGH YES.
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER CLARKE YES.
COMMISSIONER WHITE.
&gt;&gt; YES.
MOTION CARRIES UNANIMOUSLY.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU VERY MUCH SUZANNE.
THANK YOU SEATON AND OUR IT
DEPARTMENT ARE GREAT.
I DON&apos;T KNOW THAT I CAN SOLVE
THE FEED PROBLEM BUT I WOULD IF
THE COMMISSION IS AGREEABLE I
WOULD LIKE TO SUGGEST ABOUT A
TEN MINUTE BREAK SO I CAN WORK
WITH THEM TO SEE IF WE CAN GET
THE FEED GOING ON.
ZOOME FOR THOSE FOR THOSE THAT
ARE LISTENING WE ASSUME MY
APOLOGIES THAT YOU&apos;RE NOT
SEEING THE VISUALS AS A
REMINDER YOU CAN SEE THE
VISUALS THROUGH OUR ONLINE
SEATON LIVE STREAM.
IT&apos;S AVAILABLE THROUGH THE
EIGHT TO GOV DOG WEBSITE.
IT&apos;S ACTUALLY I THINK IF YOU
GOOGLE BASICALLY CITY OF ANN
ARBOR YOU TO BUY FEED YOU CAN
ALSO SEE THE VISUALS THROUGH
THAT.
I UNDERSTAND IT&apos;LL BE A LITTLE
CHALLENGE TO NAVIGATE THE CALL
AND THEN ZOOM AND THAT BUT IF
WE COULD TAKE ABOUT A TEN
MINUTE BREAK I DON&apos;T KNOW THAT
I&apos;LL BE ABLE TO FIX IT BUT
IT&apos;LL BE OUR BEST CHANCE.
&gt;&gt; THAT SOUNDS GOOD TO ME.
OK, MAYBE WE COULD RECONVENE
ABOUT 740.
THAT SOUNDS PERFECT.
OK
OK WE&apos;RE GOING TO CALL THE
MEETING BACK TO ORDER HERE.
IT LOOKS LIKE WE HAVE OUR FEED
BACK TOGETHER WHICH IS GREAT.
THANK YOU FOR SUGGESTING THAT
BREAK TO ADDRESS THAT WE ARE
MOVING ON TO ITEM EIGHT C WHICH
IS FIVE THIRTY NORD NORTH NORTH
DIVISION THIS IS A PROJECT THAT
I WORKED ON SO I NEED TO RECUSE
MYSELF SO I&apos;M HANDING THE REINS
OVER TO VICE CHAIR ABRINES SO I
WILL BE LEAVING THE MEETING AND
YOU ALL CAN CARRY ON
OK SO
WE&apos;RE ON TO ITEM EIGHT C I&apos;LL
BEGIN BY READING INTRODUCING
THE PETITION FROM THE AGENDA SO
THIS IS FOR FIVE THIRTY NORTH
DIVISION A PROPOSAL TO ADD A
REAR ADDITION TO THE EXISTING
HOUSE AND REDONE THE STRUCTURE
FROM OUR C MULTIPLE FAMILY
DWELLING DISTRICT TO PD PLANNED
UNIT DEVELOPMENT TO CONSTRUCT
AN APPROXIMATELY EIGHT THOUSAND
SQUARE FOOT HOUSE CONTAINING
FOUR DWELLING UNITS WITH SIX
BEDROOMS PER UNIT.
THE PUTTIES IS PROPOSED TO
MODIFY BUILDING SET BACKS,
CONFLICTING LAND USE BUFFERS,
DRIVEWAY WITH LANDSCAPING AND
OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS IN
EXCHANGE FOR AN ENERGY
EFFICIENT AND SUSTAINABLE
BUILDING AND THE STAFF
RECOMMENDATION IS FOR APPROVAL.
SO WE&apos;LL BEGIN WITH A PETITION
REPRESENTING ACTION FOLLOWED BY
STAFF PRESENTATION
I TO TAKE MY
MASKA NO NO YOU CAN LEAVE IT
ON.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
OK HELLO MY NAME IS DOUG SELBY.
MY WIFE JENNY JENNY AND I
BOUGHT THIS HOUSE IN 2001 AT
THE TIME IT WAS SEVERELY
BLIGHTED A LOT OF DRUG ACTIVITY
THERE AND VAGRANTS THAT WERE
SLEEPING IN ONE OF THE UNITS
WITH SOME KICKED OUT WINDOWS.
SAFE TO SAY IT WAS ONE OF THE
WORST PLACES I&apos;VE EVER BEEN IN.
WE FIXED IT UP AS BEST WE COULD
BUT I KNEW SOMEDAY WOULD HAVE
TO BE MAJORLY REBUILT OR JUST
REPLACED.
THE STRUCTURE IS NOT IN GREAT
SHAPE.
IT&apos;S LOCATED AT THE ENTRANCE TO
THE BROADWAY BRIDGE WHICH IS A
HISTORIC MEETING PLACE FOR
NATIVE AMERICANS AND THE GERMAN
IMMIGRANTS WHO WOULD BUILD THE
CITY AND IT&apos;S IN THE OLD FOURTH
WARD HISTORIC DISTRICT.
THE PROJECT WAS CONCEIVED TO
CONNECT OUR SHARED AND ARBER
HISTORY TO A CARBON NEUTRAL
FUTURE WHICH IS NOT AN OPTION
IF OUR CITY AND CIVILIZATION
ARE TO CONTINUE AND FOR THAT
REASON I&apos;M CALLING THE PROJECT
THE BRIDGE.
&gt;&gt; WE BEGAN PLANNING THIS WITH
THE CITY IN TWENTY SEVENTEEN.
THE LOT IN THE BUILDINGS HAVE
MORPHED ALL OVER THE PLACE IN
THE LAST HUNDRED AND EIGHTY
YEARS.
IT&apos;S CHANGED SHAPE A LOT AND
THE BUILDINGS AFFECT THE
BUILDING NOW IS TWO HOUSES THAT
WERE KIND OF SMASHED TOGETHER
UNDER A COMMON ROOF LINE AND
THE TO SORT OF TRADITIONAL
LOOKING HOUSES YOU SEE THERE
ARE THE FOOTPRINTS OF THOSE
HOUSES AS YOU CAN IMAGINE WITH
A HOUSE LIKE THAT THERE ARE
VARIANCES APLENTY.
THERE ARE SIX OR SO OF THEM AND
YOU CAN SEE THOSE IN YOUR PACK
AT SIX OR EIGHT WE HAD THE
CHOICE TO EITHER GO BY RIGHT.
AND WE WOULD HAVE HAD TO PARLAY
ALL OF THOSE TO A YES VOTE TO
WIN APPROVAL OF THE PROJECT.
SO IN ORDER TO AVOID THAT WE
WENT WITH A I WOULD LIKE TO SAY
THAT I THINK A LOT OF THE
VARIANCES ALTHOUGH ALL OF THEM
WERE PRETTY MINOR, A LOT
OF THEM REALLY DON&apos;T MAKE A LOT
OF SENSE.
THERE WOULD BE THE SAME
REQUIRED IF THIS WAS A FOUR
HUNDRED UNIT COMPLEX ON 20
ACRES AS IT WAS FOR A SMALL
FOUR UNIT APARTMENT IN AN URBAN
LOT.
&gt;&gt; BUT IN ANY CASE WE&apos;RE MAKING
ALMOST ALL THE VARIANCES BETTER
WITH WHAT WE&apos;RE DOING AND WE&apos;RE
CERTAINLY MATCHING THE
NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER AND
CREATING SOMETHING THAT FITS
HERE PRETTY NEATLY.
THE BRIDGE WILL BE THE MOST
SUSTAINABLE APARTMENT EVER
BUILT IN ANN ARBOR BUT
HOPEFULLY NOT THE LAST.
THERE&apos;S TOO MANY FEATURES TO GO
THROUGH IN THE SHORT TIME I
HAVE HERE BUT JUST KIND
OF SKIMMING OVER THE
MOUNTAINTOPS IT&apos;S NET ZERO
ENERGY PLUS FIVE PERCENT ABOUT
80 PERCENT WATER LESS WATER USE
THAN A CODE BUILT WITH NO LOSS
OF EXPERIENCE TO THE OCCUPANTS
.
IT&apos;S MADE WITH ALL HEALTHY AND
SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTS AND WILL
BE RECYCLING THE EXISTING HOME
TO A LARGE EXTENT INTO THE NEW
HOME.
THE TENANTS WILL HAVE
INCREDIBLY HEALTHY AIR QUALITY
AND A HIGH LEVEL OF COMFORT.
IN FACT IT&apos;S A BIOFILM LIKE
BUILDING WHICH MEANS IN PART
THAT WE&apos;VE THAT EVERY TENANT
CAN ENJOY THE OUTSIDE FROM
WITHIN THEIR UNIT AND AND THE
APARTMENT AND THERE&apos;S ALSO A
SOURCE OF FOOD FOR POLLINATORS
AND BIRDS THAT USE THE HURON
RIVER FLYWAY AS PART OF THE
LANDSCAPING.
IT&apos;S A HUNDRED NOT PREWIRED FOR
ELECTRIC CARS AND BIKES BUT
THERE IS A LOT OF SUPPORT FOR
ALTERNATIVE FORMS
OF TRANSPORTATION CERTAINLY
BICYCLING AND THE BUS SYSTEM
AND EVERYTHING IS PRETTY
WALKABLE RIGHT OUTSIDE THE DOOR
.
WE HOPE TO WORK WITH THE ANN
ARBOR STUDENT BUILDING PROGRAM.
THESE ARE HIGH SCHOOL KIDS FROM
OUR COMMUNITY THAT WORK ON
HOUSES AND LEARN HOW TO BUILD
HOUSES AS PART OF THEIR HIGH
SCHOOL CURRICULUM.
WE WOULD LIKE TO TEACH THEM
SUSTAINABLE CONSTRUCTION AND WE
CERTAINLY NEED THESE WORKERS IN
THE INDUSTRY PRETTY BADLY.
THE BRIDGE SHOULD GET A WHOLE
BUNCH OF CERTIFICATIONS
INCLUDING PASSIVE HOUSE LIVING
BUILDING CHALLENGE, LEED
PLATINUM AND ALL OF THE DEALY
CERTIFICATIONS.
SO I HOPE YOU&apos;LL FIND THAT IT
MEETS THE EXEMPLARY STATUS WITH
RESPECT TO SUSTAINABILITY.
I KNOW THIS IS A LOT TO GLOSS
OVER IN A SHORT TIME BUT I&apos;M
HAPPY TO ANSWER KIND
OF QUESTIONS YOU HAVE IN DETAIL
.
I WANTED TO SPEAK TO THE WHY
OF THIS PROJECT AND AS A FORMER
CHEMIST I CAN TELL YOU THAT
WHEN YOU HAVE A BUFFORD
SOLUTION LIKE OUR OCEANS YOU
CAN TAKE A LOT OF INPUTS FOR A
LONG TIME BEFORE CHANGING UNTIL
IT UNTIL IT CAN&apos;T ANYMORE AND
THEN YOU GET RAPIDAN
CONTROLLABLE CHANGE AND THEN
THIS IN MANY OTHER WAYS WE&apos;RE
REALLY PLAYING WITH FORCES WE
CAN&apos;T CONTROL THROUGH OUR
CARBON EMISSIONS.
HERE&apos;S SOMETHING THAT&apos;S KIND
OF SCARY IS THAT HALF OF THE
EXCESS CARBON IN OUR ATMOSPHERE
NOW HAS BEEN PUT THERE SINCE
THE PREMIERE OF THE SHOW
SEINFELD.
SO WE HAVE ABOUT TWENTY YEARS
TO CORRECT THIS PROBLEM AND GET
TO ZERO EMISSIONS OR IT&apos;S
REALLY IT&apos;S GAME OVER FOR OUR
GRANDCHILDREN&apos;S CHILDREN AND
MILLIONS OF OTHER SPECIES AS
THE SIXTH GRADE EXTINCTION
EVENT STARTS REALLY KICKING IN
IN OUR BUILDINGS THAT ARE ABOUT
40 PERCENT OF OUR TOTAL
CARBON EMISSIONS AND THEY&apos;RE
PARTICULARLY INSIDIOUS BECAUSE
THEY BIG DECADES OF CARBON INTO
EMISSION OF EMISSIONS INTO IT
BY FOSSIL FUEL APPLIANCES AND
EQUIPMENT.
&gt;&gt; SO MY WIFE AND I MADE THE
DECISION EARLY ON TO DO IT
RIGHT OR DON&apos;T DO IT AT ALL.
SO A MAJOR GOAL FOR US WAS TO
BUILD THIS IS IF OUR KIDS
FUTURE DEPENDED ON IT AND TO
TRY TO INSPIRE OTHERS TO DO THE
SAME.
OF COURSE NOT GOING BROKE DOING
IT WAS ANOTHER MAJOR GOAL AND
THAT&apos;S BEING TESTED SEVERELY.
SO LISTEN, I WASN&apos;T SURE WHAT I
WAS GOING TO SAY IN TEN MINUTES
THAT YOU DON&apos;T KNOW FROM THE
PACK IT ALREADY.
SO I&apos;VE JUST DECIDED TO SPEAK
MY MIND TONIGHT AND I HOPE
THAT&apos;S OK.
IT&apos;S OLD GRIFFITH WHO IS AN
INVENTOR.
A GREEN INFLUENCER ONCE SAID
THAT LOCAL BUREAUCRACY IS THE
BIGGEST THREAT TO TRANSITION TO
A SUSTAINABLE ECONOMY AND
TYPICALLY THE MORE LIBERAL CITY
IS THE WORSE IT WILL BE.
&gt;&gt; IRONICALLY AND THAT&apos;S SADLY
WHAT I&apos;VE EXPERIENCED IN ANN
ARBOR THE STARTED FIVE YEARS
AGO.
BUT I&apos;M JUST HERE TONIGHT AND
GRANTED THERE WAS A PANDEMIC IN
THERE.
BUT REALLY TO BE HONEST I&apos;M
SURPRISED I&apos;M HERE AT ALL GIVEN
THE NUMBER OF THINGS THAT I HAD
TO FIGHT THROUGH TO GET GET
PAST SEVERAL THINGS THAT
CONSPIRED TO TO KILL THE
PROJECT ALONG THE WAY IT HAS
STRONG COMMUNITY SUPPORT AND
STRONG NEIGHBORHOOD SUPPORT AND
THE CITY SAYS THIS IS THE KIND
OF DEVELOPMENT THAT THE CITY&apos;S
LOOKING
FOR.
SO THAT&apos;S KIND OF BAFFLING TO
ME.
AND KEEP IN MIND I&apos;M ASKING TO
REBUILD A FAILING STRUCTURE
WITH THE EXACT SAME NUMBER
OF UNITS THAT HAVE BEEN ON THE
SITE FOR SINCE BEFORE I WAS
BORN.
IT&apos;S COMPLETELY CONSISTENT WITH
THE UNDERLYING ZONING AND THE
CITY&apos;S MASTER PLAN.
IT&apos;S LESS NONCONFORMING AND
WHAT EXISTS NOW AND IT CRUSHES
EVERY SINGLE ONE OF THE CITY&apos;S
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS.
FRANKLY, I FEEL LIKE I SHOULD
HAVE BEEN HERE IN TWENTY
EIGHTEEN.
IF I HAD BEEN IT WOULD HAVE
COST ABOUT FIFTY PERCENT LESS
TO PLAN AND BUILD.
&gt;&gt; THIS HAS NOT BEEN A SMART
FINANCIAL MOVE FOR MY WIFE AND
I AND YOU KNOW IT WAS ALMOST
KILLED SEVERAL TIMES AFTER
SPENDING HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF DOLLARS TO GET HERE.
I FOUND THE PROCESS TO BE
UNPREDICTABLE AND CAPRICIOUS
AND I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW THE CITY
EXPECTS THAT WE&apos;RE GOING TO
SOLVE THIS PROBLEM IF THIS IS
WHAT AN AVERAGE HOMEOWNER HAS
TO GO THROUGH TO MAKE A BETTER
PROPERTY THAN WHAT EXISTS AT
THE CITY NOW WE&apos;LL ALSO BE
FORCED TO SPEND SIX FIGURES
TEARING UP THE STREET IN FRONT
TO PLACE REPLACE A WATER MAIN.
WE&apos;VE PROVED TO THE CITY THAT
NONE OF THE RESIDENTS WILL NEED
NOW OR IN THE FUTURE AND WE&apos;LL
PROBABLY BE DESTROYING THE
CITY&apos;S BRAND NEW BIKE LANE WHEN
WE DO THAT.
SO THAT WASTED MONEY HAS TO
COME FROM SOMEWHERE AND IT&apos;S
PART OF THE REASON THAT
NEIGHBORS, TEACHERS HOSPITAL
STAFF, RESTAURANT WORKERS OR
YOUNG PROFESSIONALS OUR
STUDENTS REALLY CAN&apos;T AFFORD TO
LIVE HERE EASILY ANYMORE AND
EVERY ONE OF THEM IS SPEWING
CARBON OUT OF THEIR VEHICLES AS
THEY DRIVE HERE TO WORK OR TO
GO TO SCHOOL.
SO A FRIEND OF MINE HAS AN
EMAIL SIGNATURE THAT SAYS IF
YOU&apos;RE AN EXTINCTION LEVEL
EVENT, ACT LIKE IT.
I&apos;M FAR FROM THE ONLY ONE WHO&apos;S
EXPERIENCED THIS.
IT&apos;S EXPENSIVE AND REALLY
DOESN&apos;T SEEM TO WORK DO THIS
WORK IN ANN ARBOR AND I JUST
FEEL LIKE WE&apos;RE RUNNING OUT
OF TIME SO I HATE TO SAY IT BUT
UNLESS I EVER GET SERIOUS ABOUT
SOLVING THIS PROBLEM WHEN IT
COMES TO SUSTAINABILITY AND
AFFORDABILITY IT&apos;S JUST
THOUGHTS AND PRAYERS.
THERE&apos;S A TON OF REALLY GREAT
AND TALENTED PEOPLE AT THE CITY
AND I FEEL THAT SURELY
COLLECTIVELY WE CAN FIND A
BETTER WAY.
I SHOULD ADD THAT THERE&apos;S A LOT
OF REALLY SMART AND DEDICATED
PEOPLE WHO WORK HERE THAT DO
CARE AND I KNOW THAT SOME
OF THEM ARE JUST AS FRUSTRATED
WITH THE PROCESS AS I HAVE
BEEN.
SO I&apos;M HOPING THE CITY HAS THE
FORTITUDE TO ADDRESS THIS.
WILLIAM MCDONALD ONCE SAID IF
YOU&apos;RE TRYING TO GET TO CANADA
BUT DRIVING TO MEXICO, SLOWING
DOWN DOESN&apos;T REALLY HELP IN
TERMS OF SUSTAINABILITY.
THIS PROJECT IS NOT MERELY LESS
BAD BUT IS ACTUALLY MADE TO BE
REGENERATIVE TO THE SITE.
SO IN MY MIND IT REPRESENTS
TURNING THE CAR AROUND.
WE TRIED OUR BEST TO MAKE
SOMETHING THAT FITS THE
NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER.
WE WORKED WITH THE NEIGHBORHOOD
ASSOCIATION TO MAKE SURE IT WAS
SOMETHING THAT THEY COULD LIVE
WITH AND LIKED AND IT&apos;S THE
FARTHEST WE COULD GO TOWARDS
TRUE SUSTAINABILITY.
MOST OF ALL WE REALLY WANTED TO
BE A TEMPLATE FOR OTHERS
BECAUSE BUILDING THIS WAY EVERY
NOW AND THEN WHEN SOMEBODY
DECIDES TO DO IT JUST ISN&apos;T
GOING TO GET US THERE.
SO I HOPE IT WILL HAVE AN
IMPACT.
WE HOPE YOU GUYS LIKE THE
PROJECT.
WE HOPE YOU&apos;LL VOTE TONIGHT TO
PASS IT ON TO THE CITY COUNCIL
FOR APPROVAL.
THANK THANK YOU.
AND I THINK I SAW MR. CHANG
JOINING FOR THE STOCK REPORT.
YES.
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
YEP.
EXCELLENT.
&gt;&gt; LET ME SEE IF I CAN ALSO
SHARE HERE MY SCREEN
OK.
&gt;&gt; CAN YOU SEE THE SITE PLAN?
YES WE CAN SELECT SEE OK I&apos;LL
JUST KIND OF ADD TO WHAT MR.
SELBY HAD DESCRIBED WITH THE
PROJECT.
IT IS ABOUT A ONE NINE ACRE
SITE WHICH IS AROUND AROUND
NINE THOUSAND SQUARE FEET
ITSELF IS KIND OF THE BROADWAY
BRIDGE IS LOCATED.
IT DOES HAVE AN EXISTING GRAVEL
PARKING LOT WHICH THEY&apos;RE GOING
TO FORMALIZE INTO SIX CAR
PARKING SPACES AND I&apos;LL MOVE ON
TO ANOTHER SLIDE THERE.
IT DOES HAVE IN FACT FOUR UNITS
THAT ARE EXISTING BUT THEY
TOTAL TEN BEDROOMS AND HE&apos;S
GOING FROM FOUR UNITS TO SIX
BEDROOMS APIECE FOR A TOTAL
OF TWENTY FOUR TWENTY FOUR
BEDROOMS WHICH WAS PREVIOUSLY
MENTIONED.
IT IS IN THE HISTORIC DISTRICT
.
IT WAS APPROVED AND I THINK THE
REASON PROBABLY BACK IN TWENTY
EIGHTEEN ULTIMATELY WHY THEY
DECIDED TO REZONE TO A BEAUTY
SITE PLAN AS OPPOSED TO GOING
WITH YOU KNOW, JUST A REGULAR
SITE PLAN IS THAT THERE WERE
SEVERAL VARIANCES THAT WOULD BE
REQUIRED AND THOSE ARE
VARIANCES INCLUDE YOU KNOW, THE
CONFLICTING VALUES BUFFER WHICH
WOULD HAVE TO SCREEN FROM
RESIDENTIAL ZONING OR
RESIDENTIAL USES WHICH ARE TO
THE EAST AND TO THE SOUTH.
THEY ALSO HAVE SETBACK ISSUES
TO THE NORTH AND TO THE FRONT.
IT&apos;S A TWENTY FIVE FOOT FRONT
MINIMUM SET BACK THERE ARE
APPROXIMATELY TEN FEET AND I
THINK THAT&apos;S AT LEAST AT LEAST
TWELVE FEET TO THE NORTH AND
THEY REDUCE IT DOWN TO
APPROXIMATELY THREE AND A HALF
FEET THERE ALSO HAVE A DRIVEWAY
WITH ISSUE FOR MULTIFAMILY.
THEY ARE PROPOSING A TEN FOOT
DRIVEWAY AND ALL OF THESE ITEMS
WOULD BE CAN BE APPROVED AS
PART OF THE PARTY&apos;S
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS MOVED
TO ANOTHER SHEET I THINK WITH
THE LAND.
SO THIS IS THE PROPOSED
BUILDING.
YOU CAN SEE THE IT&apos;S A
RETAINING WALL ON NORTH
PROPERTY LINE.
YOU CAN SEE THE OUTLINE OF THE
PROPOSED BUILDING ESPECIALLY IN
ADDITION TO THE REAR THE TOTAL
IS APPROXIMATELY NINE THOUSAND
SQUARE FEET.
THIS IS WHERE THE PARKING THE
SIX PARKING SPACES ARE TO THE
REAR.
&gt;&gt; THEY WILL BE EITHER CAPABLE
OR EVEN INSTALLED SINCE THIS
WAS ACTUALLY DEVELOPED THE
MINIMUM AMOUNT REQUIRED PARKING
IT WAS SIX PARKING SPACES BUT
SINCE THEN WE&apos;VE WAIVED THAT.
BUT THERE ARE SIX PARKING
SPACES WHICH IS ONE AND A HALF
PER DWELLING UNIT.
THERE ARE THREE LANDMARK TREES
NONE OF THEM ARE REALLY ON.
BUT IF YOU COULD SEE MY CURSOR
TOUR TO THE NORTH ONE IS IN THE
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY.
THE ONE OF THE PUBLIC RIGHT
AWAY IS NOT TO BE REMOVED BUT
IT DOES HAVE IMPACT.
SO THEY HAVE INSTALLED
MITIGATION LANDSCAPING AROUND
THE SITE IN CASE THAT TREE
DOESN&apos;T MAKE IT.
YOU CAN SEE THE MITIGATION
LANDSCAPING THERE ALONG
ESPECIALLY ALONG THE NORTH
PROPERTY LINE THERE&apos;S THE
CONFLICTING LAND USE BUFFER
THAT&apos;S PROBABLY APPROXIMATELY
FIVE FEET WIDE TO THE EAST
THERE IS JUST A PARKING LOT
EVEN THOUGH IT&apos;S ZONED OUT FOR
IT REQUIRES A CLUB.
IT IS REALLY JUST SCREENING
FROM SURFACE PARKING LOT.
THERE&apos;S ALSO RESIDENTIAL TO THE
SOUTH.
THEY ARE GOING TO PUT UP A FOUR
FOOT LONG FENCE MINIMUM THAT&apos;S
ALONG THE PROPERTY LINE AND AT
LEAST ALONG THE DRIVE PORTION
THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S SCREENED IN THIS
AREA THAT MY WHERE MY CURSOR
IS.
THEY DO HAVE A LITTLE BIT
OF CONFLICTING LAND USE BUFFER
WITH THEIR BUT OF COURSE IT&apos;S
FOR THE MOST PART IT&apos;S A SHARED
DRIVEWAY WITH THE PROPERTY
OWNER TO THE SOUTH.
I&apos;M PROBABLY FORGETTING SOME
STUFF BUT I&apos;M HERE FOR ANY
QUESTIONS YOU MAY HAVE AS PART
OF THE PUDI SUPPLEMENTAL REGS
WE&apos;RE ATTACHED TO THE STAFF
REPORT AND I CAN REFERENCE THE
SITE PLAN AT ANY POINT IF YOU
HAVE QUESTIONS RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
I WANT TO MOVE TO THE PUBLIC
HEARING THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR PERSONS TO SPEAK FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES ABOUT FIVE THIRTY
NORTH DIVISION STREET PD ZONING
WELL FIRST CALL ON INDIVIDUALS
PRESENT TO ADDRESS THE
COMMISSION, THEN REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK DURING A
PUBLIC HEARING REMOTELY PRESS
STAR NINE IF LISTENING BY PHONE
OR USE A RAISE HAND FEATURE
VIEWING THROUGH THE WEB LINK
FOR PHONE ACCESS CALL EIGHT
SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE
FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN AND ENTER
MEETING ID NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX
THREE FOUR ONE TWO TWO SIX CITY
STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS THAT
HAVE RAISED THEIR HAND USING
THE LAST THREE DIGITS OF YOUR
PHONE NUMBER OR BY NAME IF
AVAILABLE FOR THOSE ACCESSING
THROUGH THE WEB LINK YOU&apos;LL
HEAR AN AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT
THAT THE HOST IS ALLOWING YOU
TO SPEAK WHEN SPEAKING PLEASE
MOVE TO A QUIET AREA AND MUTE
ANY TELEVISION OR BACKGROUND
SOUNDS SO THAT WE MEET SO THAT
WE MAY HEAR YOU CLEARLY FOR
EITHER METHOD OF PARTICIPATION.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
TIME YOU COULD APPROACH THE
PODIUM.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; HI I&apos;M ED MAHONEY.
FOURTEEN THIRTEEN SZáJER THE
ROAD INTERURBAN I HAVE FOR
FORTY YEARS OWNED A HISTORIC
HOUSE AT TWENTY FOUR HUNDRED
NORTH TWO.
I&apos;M SORRY IF TO FOR NORTH
DIVISION STREET S AND JOINING
THE FIVE THIRTY NORTH DIVISION
STREET PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.
I STARTED MY FAMILY AT MY FIVE
TO NORTH DIVISION STREET HOUSE
AND LIVED THERE FOR NINE YEARS
I WHEN I AM A WIDOW I PLAN ON
MOVING BACK AND RETURNING.
I WAS A FOUNDING MEMBER OF THE
OLD FOURTH WARD HISTORIC
DISTRICT PENN THE STATE
DOCUMENTS TO CREATE THE
HISTORIC DISTRICT NON PROFIT
STATUS AND I PAID THE STATE
FILING FEE FOR MY OWN FINANCES
AT THAT TIME I EMAC
METICULOUSLY RESTORED MY
WRAPAROUND PORCH BACK TO ITS
ORIGINAL GRANDEUR BEFORE THE
HISTORIC DISTRICT EXISTED I
WORKED FOR THE ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY AND RESEARCH
TESTING AND ENFORCEMENT
RECEIVING SPECIAL ACHIEVEMENT
AWARD FOR MY WORK THAT
DEVELOPED INTO A NATIONAL TEST
FOR TRUCK EXHAUST EMISSION
TESTING.
&gt;&gt; I HAVE ACTIVELY REDUCED THE
CARBON FOOTPRINT FOR OVER 50
YEARS.
&gt;&gt; I COMPLETELY OPPOSE TO
CHANGING THE ZONE SO THAT ONE
INDIVIDUAL PERSON CAN REAP A
PROFIT.
I THINK THE DEVELOPMENT AT FIVE
THIRTY FOR NORTH DIVISION
STREET HAS
BEEN A SMOKE AND
MIRRORS PROJECT SINCE IT BEGAN.
I WAS LED TO BELIEVE BY MR
SHELBY THE EXISTING BUILDING
WAS GOING TO STAY AND REHABBED
BACK TO ITS EIGHTEEN SIXTY
GRANDER AND ADDITIONS AND IN
ADDITION ADDED THAT WOULD BE
WITHIN THE ORIGINAL STRUCTURE
FOOTPRINT ENCLOSING THE REAR
PORCHES IN THE ADDITION,
HOWEVER, THE PLAN SHOWS THE
COMPLETE THAT THE COMPLETE
THREE THOUSAND SQUARE FOOT
STRUCTURE INCLUDING THE
BASEMENT WILL BE REMOVED AND A
NEW EIGHT THOUSAND SQUARE FOOT
BUILDING WILL TAKE ITS PLACE.
APPARENTLY WHOMEVER WROTE THE
REZONING PORTION FOR THE CITY
WAS CONFUSED.
&gt;&gt; ALSO IT STATES THAT THE
PURPOSE THE PROPOSED AND THE
PROPOSED PUDI SUPPLEMENTAL
REGULATIONS ALLOW THE FOLLOWING
USE AND CONFIGURATION OF THE
SITE A THREE STORY ADDITION ON
THE REAR OF THE EXISTING QUAD
COMPLEX.
&gt;&gt; SO YOUR TIME IS UP.
THANK YOU.
I WOULD LIKE TO BE ABLE
WE HAVE
ANOTHER THERE&apos;S A THREE MINUTE
LIMIT TO EACH SPEAKER, SIR,
COULD I CONTINUE?
NO, I&apos;M SORRY.
THANK YOU.
IS THERE ANYBODY ELSE PRESENT
WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK TO YOU
CAN APPROACH THE PODIUM.
THANK YOU
.
I APPRECIATE YOU LISTENING.
THE COMMENTS THAT I HAVE SARAH
EYERLY 14 13 SHATTERED ROAD
HAVE TO DO WITH THE STAFF
RECOMMENDATION AND I WILL
UNPACK IT OUT OF ORDER TAKING
ONE OF THE SENTENCES OUT
OF THAT RECOMMENDATION WILL NOT
HAVE A DETRIMENTAL EFFECT ON
PUBLIC UTILITIES OR SURROUNDING
PROPERTIES.
I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW THE PLANNING
GROUP COULD SUPPORT THIS
WITHOUT ASKING ADJACENT
HOMEOWNERS THAT THERE WOULD BE
NO DETRIMENTAL EFFECT.
IT SEEMS OVERREACHING.
FOR EXAMPLE, 416 TRIPS OF CITY
SERVICE TRUCKS UP OR UP AND
DOWN A ONE WAY DRIVEWAY THAT&apos;S
NEVER EXISTED BEFORE.
THAT IS BY RESEARCH FROM THE
SOLID WASTE DEPARTMENT ABOUT
WHAT WOULD NEED TO SERVE THIS
24 BEDROOM UNIT FOR DIFFERENT
SERVICE TRUCKS EVERY MONDAY ONE
WAY ON NORTH DIVISION STREET
WHICH TO THE CITY&apos;S CREDIT HAS
A LOT OF FOOT TRAFFIC, A LOT
OF BICYCLE TRAFFIC, NO BIKE
LANE.
SO I DON&apos;T KNOW WHAT WOULD GET
DESTROYED OUT FRONT THERE.
THE BIKE LANE ENDS ALMOST TWO
BLOCKS UP THEN BECOMES EXCUSE
ME A LITTLE WHITE LINE.
I REALLY ENCOURAGE YOU TO WALK
DOWN THERE AND SEE THE PROPERTY
TO GET THE FACTS FOR YOURSELF
BY THE TIME YOU REACH ABOUT
FIVE TWENTY NORTH DIVISION
THERE&apos;S NO BIKE LANE PEOPLE ARE
RIDING ON THE SIDEWALK OR
THEY&apos;RE CREATING TRAFFIC HAVING
TO PULL OVER TO THE LEFT
BECAUSE THEY&apos;RE RIDING IN THE
STREET AND AMAZON TRUCKS SIT IN
FRONT OF THE UNIT SO WE GO FROM
TEN BEDROOMS TO TWENTY FOUR ONE
WAY DRIVEWAY BACKING UP AND
BACKING OUT EVERY MONDAY IS A
DETRIMENTAL EFFECT TO THE
NEIGHBORS AND I&apos;M AFRAID TO
PUBLIC SAFETY AND THAT AREA
WITHOUT BEING DRAMATIC PROVIDES
ADEQUATE JUSTIFICATION AND
READING AGAIN FOR DEVIATION
FROM THE MASTER PLAN.
CAN MR. SELBY DEVIATE FROM
USING THE E.V. READY CARPORT
STALLS IF ONLY GAS GUZZLING
TENNANT&apos;S SHOULD SIGN LEASES
CAN HE DEVIATE FROM ACHIEVING
NET ZERO?
HOW FAR CAN HE GO FROM
DEVIATING FROM THAT ZERO AS THE
CITY REASONS BENDS A LOT
OF SETBACKS MAKE SO MANY
ACCOMMODATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
ARE THEIR TEETH TO THOSE
PROMISES?
&gt;&gt; THANK THANK YOU.
IS THERE ANYBODY ELSE PRESENT
WHO WOULD LIKE TO ADDRESS THE
COMMISSION?
YOU CAN STEP TO THE PODIUM.
THANKS.
HELLO.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS DENHA GEELHOED AND
I&apos;M A TENANT AT THE FIVE THIRTY
MADRASSAHS FIVE THIRTY TWO
NORTH DIVISION THAN THE
BUILDING OF DISCUSSION.
I&apos;M TIFFANY.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M ALSO A TENANT FACTORY TO
NORTH DIVISION STREET SO MY
HUSBAND AND I REALIZED THAT
THIS PROJECT IS PROBABLY MOVING
FORWARD AND GENERALLY WE ARE IN
FAVOR OF THIS MOVEMENT.
WE ARE BOTH A GRADUATE
ENVIRONMENTAL STUDENTS HERE AT
U OF M BUT WE NEVER KNEW ABOUT
THE PROJECT AND FOUND OUT THAT
THIS BUILDING IS BEING
RENOVATED BY RECEIVING THE
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE ABOUT
THIS MEETING TWO WEEKS AGO WE
WERE UNEXPECTEDLY LOSING OUR
HOUSING.
THIS IS HAVING RIPPLING EFFECTS
IN OUR LIVES INCLUDING THE
FINANCIAL IMPACTS OF MOVING
HERE AND HAVING TO FIND NEW
HOUSING UNEXPECTEDLY.
WE JUST WANTED TO BRING UP THE
POINT AND THE BUSTLE OF THE
EXCITING ADVANCES AND
SUSTAINABILITY PROJECTS AND
HOUSING POLICY.
WE MUST NOT FORGET THE HUMAN
SIDE OF THIS ISSUE.
THESE DECISIONS HAVE REAL
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE LIVES AND
FOLKS ANN ARBOR AND AT A
MINIMUM WE NEED TO MAKE SURE
THAT TENANTS ARE BEING NOTIFIED
AS SOON AS POSSIBLE ABOUT THESE
CHANGES.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
IS THERE ANYBODY ELSE PRESENT
WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK
?
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER APRON&apos;S
KEN GARBER AGAIN.
YEAH AS A AS A RENTER MYSELF IN
THIS TOWN.
YEAH I FEEL FOR THE TENANTS
OF FIVE THIRTY NORTH DIVISION
THIS IS A REALLY TOUGH TIME
ESPECIALLY TO GET BACK ON THE
RENTAL MARKET WHICH I HAVE TO
DO PERIODICALLY AS WELL.
BUT MAINLY I&apos;M HERE TO TALK IN
STRONG SUPPORT OF THIS PROJECT
WHICH IS UNUSUAL FOR ME AS YOU
KNOW, IT&apos;S RARE THAT I
WHOLEHEARTEDLY SUPPORT A
DEVELOPMENT PETITION BUT THIS
IS A FANTASTIC PROJECT.
I DIDN&apos;T KNOW MR. SELBY UNTIL
JUST NOW.
I JUST MET HIM DURING THE BREAK
BUT I&apos;VE BEEN FOLLOWING HIS
PROJECT FROM AFAR FOR SEVERAL
YEARS AND I AM CONFIDENT THAT
PROFIT IS NOT HIS MOTIVE HERE.
HE&apos;S DEEPLY CONCERNED ABOUT THE
CLIMATE CRISIS AND WANTS TO
MAKE OUR CONTRIBUTION THAT CAN
SET AN EXAMPLE FOR OTHERS IN
ANN ARBOR AND ELSEWHERE SO HE
CAN SPEAK MORE TO HIS PROJECT
THAN I CAN.
BUT FROM WHAT I UNDERSTAND,
THIS IS A BUILDING BUILT TO
PASSIVE HOUSE STANDARDS AND
MORE IMPORTANTLY LIVING
BUILDING CHALLENGE STANDARDS IN
OTHER WORDS, IT&apos;S A BUILDING
THAT PRODUCES MORE ENERGY THAN
IT CONSUMES ALL ELECTRIC
OF COURSE NO GAS WITH EXTENSIVE
ROOFTOP SOLAR AND BATTERY
STORAGE BUT WITH A VERY TIGHT
BUILDING ENVELOPE THAT BREATHE
USING ESV ENERGY
RECOVERY VENTILATION IT WILL
EMPLOY RECYCLED AND
ECOLOGICALLY FRIENDLY MATERIALS
AND MODULAR CONSTRUCTION.
AT LEAST THAT WAS THE PLAN
EARLIER ON.
AS MR. SHELBY JUST MENTIONED,
IT WILL SEEK TO REUSE MUCH
OF THE ORIGINAL BUILDING
MATERIAL AS POSSIBLE AND KEEP
AND REUSE ALL THE STORMWATER ON
THE SITE.
ACCORDING TO THIS SITE PLAN,
THIS WILL BE ONE OF THE MOST
SUSTAINABLE BUILDINGS IN THE
COUNTRY BUT NOT NECESSARY NOT
ONE OF THE MOST EXPENSIVE.
MR. SELBY HAS SAID IN THE PAST
THAT HE DOESN&apos;T THINK A NET
ZERO BUILDING SHOULD INCREASE
THE RENTAL RATES BEYOND MARKET
VALUE.
OVERALL, THIS IS A
TRANSFORMATIONAL PLAN FOR
BUILDING THAT SHOULD BE A MODEL
FOR RENTAL HOUSING NOT JUST
LOCALLY BUT NATIONALLY.
SO I&apos;M VERY RELIEVED TO SEE
THAT IT&apos;S COME THIS FAR.
I&apos;M OF WAS PUZZLED THAT IT&apos;S
TAKEN SO LONG.
I HOPE THAT CITY OFFICIALS TAKE
MR. SELBY&apos;S COMMENTS TO HEART
ABOUT SOME OF THE HOOPS HE&apos;S
HAD TO JUMP THROUGH, MANY
OF WHICH SEEM TO HAVE BEEN
UNNECESSARY OVERALL.
AGAIN, PLEASE APPROVE THIS PUDI
AND MOVE IT FORWARD TO CITY
COUNCIL.
THANK YOU.
IS THERE ANYBODY ELSE PRESENT
WHO WOULD LIKE TO ADDRESS THE
COMMISSION?
MR. LEONARD, DO YOU SEE ANYBODY
WHO WOULD LIKE TO ADDRESS US
REMOTELY?
WE DO COLOR WITH THE PHONE
NUMBER ENDING WITH SEVEN FIVE
ONE YOU CAN PRESS STAR SIX TO
ANSWER YOUR PHONE AND ADDRESS
THE COMMISSION FOR UP TO THREE
MINUTES
.
&gt;&gt; GO AHEAD CALLER.
HELLO MY NAME IS CROCKET.
I&apos;M PRESIDENT OF THE OLD FOURTH
WARD ASSOCIATION AND I&apos;VE LIVED
IN THE FOURTH WARD HISTORIC
DISTRICT FOR 42 YEARS ONLY
ABOUT A BLOCK AWAY FROM THIS
PROJECT.
&gt;&gt; SO SINCE THE BEGINNING
OF THIS PROJECT DOUG SELBY HAS
CONSULTED WITH US ABOUT
HIS
PLANS, HIS CONCEPT AND ALL THE
WORK THAT HE WANTED TO DO ON
THIS SITE.
WE&apos;VE BEEN ENTHUSIASTIC FROM
THE GET GO AND WE REALLY LOVE
THIS PROJECT.
I&apos;VE ALREADY SENT YOU A LETTER
EXPRESSING THE ENTHUSIASM
OF THE OLD FOURTH WARD HISTORIC
DISTRICT BOARD AND I MUST SAY
THAT DOUG SELBY IS A MODEL
OF INVOLVING THE STAKEHOLDERS
IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
WE MET WITH HIM ON A NUMBER
OF OCCASIONS AND ALSO WE WENT
BEFORE THE HISTORIC DISTRICT
COMMISSION TO ADVOCATE FOR THE
APPROVAL OF THIS PRODUCT
PROJECT WHICH THEY DID AND
NEIGHBORHOOD IS THE MOST
DENSELY POPULATED NEIGHBORHOOD
IN ALL OF ANN ARBOR AND WE HAVE
JUST ABOUT 100 PERCENT TURNOVER
OF POPULATION EVERY YEAR.
&gt;&gt; THIS IS A REAL CHALLENGE AND
I&apos;M VERY SYMPATHETIC TO THE
YOUNG WOMEN WHO SPOKE ABOUT
BEING DISPLACED.
IT HAPPENS EVERY SINGLE YEAR
THAT WE HAVE JUST ABOUT ONE
HUNDRED PERCENT TURNOVER.
&gt;&gt; THERE ARE VERY FEW OF US WHO
ARE OWNER OCCUPANTS.
WE ALSO HAVE TO ENDURE A LOT
OF THINGS IN TERMS OF CITY
NEGLECT OF THIS NEIGHBORHOOD
AND WE&apos;RE HOPING THAT DOUG
CELL-BASED PROJECT WILL SHINE A
LIGHT ON THE IMPORTANCE OF THIS
NEIGHBORHOOD.
KINGSLY STREET WHERE I LIVE HAS
BEEN A FAILING STREET FOR ABOUT
A DECADE AND YET THE CITY PAYS
NO ATTENTION TO IT.
&gt;&gt; WE WANT YOU TO PAY ATTENTION
TO HOW IMPORTANT THIS
NEIGHBORHOOD IS AND HOW
BEAUTIFUL IT IS AND WHAT ITS
POTENTIAL IS.
DOUG SELBY IS DOING IT.
&gt;&gt; THIS IS A REAL SIGN OF HOPE
FOR THIS NEIGHBORHOOD JUST AS
ALL THE PEOPLE WHO ARE OWNER
OCCUPANTS LONG TERM RESIDENTS
OF THIS NEIGHBORHOOD HAVE ALSO
INVESTED IN MAKING OUR HOUSES
MORE ENERGY EFFICIENT.
DOUG SELBY IS DOING THE SAME
HERE AND WE ALL MOVED HERE
BECAUSE WE WANTED TO BE IN A
WALKABLE NEIGHBORHOOD LONG
BEFORE IT WAS EVER IN FASHION.
IT&apos;S CURRENTLY IN FASHION BUT
WHEN WE MOVED HERE IT WAS NOT
THIRTY MORE SECONDS.
SO I WANT YOU TO REALLY SUPPORT
THIS PROJECT.
THANK THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; NO NO OTHER SPEAKERS
INDICATED THANK YOU.
SO I&apos;LL CLOSE THE PUBLIC
HEARING AND I&apos;LL READ THE
PROPOSED MOTION.
THE ANN ARBOR CITY PLANNING
COMMISSION RECOMMENDS THAT THE
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL APPROVE
FIVE THIRTY NORTH DIVISION
STREET PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
PUDI ZONING DISTRICT AND
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS AND
THE PUDI SITE PLAN MOVED BY
COMMISSIONER MILLS SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER SAUVé.
WE CAN NOW MOVE TO DISCUSSION
OF THE PROPOSED MOTION IS THERE
ANYBODY WHO&apos;D LIKE TO BEGIN
COMMISSIONER SAUVé?
UM THANK YOU FOR BRINGING US
FORWARD.
&gt;&gt; I BELIEVE IT IS MEETING
SEVERAL OF OUR GOALS IN TERMS
OF INCREASED DENSITY AND
SUSTAINABILITY.
I HAVE MAYBE A COUPLE
OF QUESTIONS FOR THE PETITIONER
FIRST IF YEAH.
COULD YOU SPEAK TO THE TIMELINE
FOR DEVELOPMENT AND THE PROCESS
MOVING FORWARD RELATIVE TO YOUR
CURRENT LEASES AND WHEN THE
PROJECT MIGHT START YOU BECAME
YES OVER NEW LEASES ARE UP ON
MAY 20TH AND WE WOULD BE
STARTING ON WITH THE
CONSTRUCTION OF THE HOUSE ON
MAY 21ST.
WE ANTICIPATE I HAVE SIX MONTHS
TO BUILD IT.
WE THINK WE CAN COULD BUILD IT
IN EIGHT.
IT&apos;S GOING TO SLOW DOWN A LOT
IF WE HAVE THE ENTIRE STUDENT
BUILDERS THERE.
BUT I ACTUALLY THINK THAT&apos;S A
GOOD THING.
&gt;&gt; OK, SO THERE&apos;S NO KIND
OF TERMINATION OR CHANGE OF THE
LEASES AS IT IS BUT THERE&apos;S
ALSO NO KIND OF RENEWAL
OPPORTUNITY FOR CURRENT.
&gt;&gt; I WOULD SAY THAT I APOLOGIZE
TO THE YOUNG LADIES HERE.
WE&apos;VE HAD AN EMAIL EXCHANGE
TODAY BUT MY WIFE&apos;S REALLY GOOD
AT MANAGING PROPERTIES AND AND
SHE DID WE&apos;VE HAD TO MOVE THE
DATE BACK THREE TIMES NOW SO I
THINK IT JUST KIND OF FELL
THROUGH THE CRACKS IN THIS
PARTICULAR CASE.
BUT MOST OF THE TENANTS IN THE
BUILDING HAVE BEEN INFORMED AND
HAVE RENEWED KNOWING THAT THEY
WOULD HAVE ONE MORE YEAR THERE.
SO I FEEL BAD ABOUT THAT.
I&apos;M SORRY.
&gt;&gt; APPRECIATE IT.
I HAD A KIND OF YOU TALKED
ABOUT IT BRIEFLY.
I&apos;M HOPING THAT YOU COULD TALK
A LITTLE BIT MORE THAT YOU
REFERENCED THE NATIVE PAST
OF THE NEIGHBORHOOD AND THE
SUSTAINABLE AND NET ZERO WHICH
YOU KNOW, SOUNDS LIKE A
HISTORIC AND CULTURAL PRACTICES
TO BE, YOU KNOW, PRESERVED AND
INTRODUCED.
CAN YOU SHARE SOME MORE
INFORMATION ABOUT THAT AND THEN
YOUR EXPERIENCE FROM THE
HISTORIC DISTRICT AND WHAT WHAT
BOUNDING BOX OF TIMELINE THE
HISTORIC FRAMES AS VALUABLE
VERSUS THE KIND OF APPLICATION
OF YOUR SUSTAINABLE VALUES TO
THE NATIVE HISTORY OF THE AREA
MORE SO CAN YOU JUST EXPLAIN A
LITTLE BIT MORE IF YOU KNOW
ABOUT THE KIND OF NATIVE
HISTORY OF THE AREA, THE
INTERSECTION SO DOWN AT THE
BOTTOM OF BROADWAY WHERE THE
BRIDGE IS NOW THAT IS TO BE THE
SPOT WHERE YOU WOULD FORWARD
THE RIVER AND SO FOR THE FIRST
PROBABLY 40 OR 50 YEARS OF THE
CITY THAT WAS A MEETING SPOT
AND THAT&apos;S WHERE THE DEPOT CAME
.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, IT BECAME A
IT BECAME A PLACE FIRST WHERE
THE NATIVE AMERICANS WERE WOULD
MEET WITH WITH THE GERMAN
SETTLERS WHO WERE HERE AND THEN
LATER IT BECAME A MEETING PLACE
FOR THE GERMAN SETTLERS.
I I DON&apos;T THINK THERE&apos;S MUCH
OF THAT LEFT SO I CAN&apos;T SAY
THAT PRESERVING ANYTHING OF THE
NATIVE HISTORY THERE IS NOT
REALLY ANY NOW SAME FOR THE
BUILDING ITSELF.
ONE OF THE REASONS THAT THIS
WAS ABLE TO GET A
NONCONTRIBUTING STATUS WAS
BECAUSE THERE IS LITERALLY NOT
ONE MATERIAL LEFT ON THE HOUSE.
OTHER INCITING UNDER THREE
LAYERS OF OTHER SIDING THAT HAS
NO ABILITY TO BE SAVED ANYMORE.
THE REST OF IT IS TWO BUILDINGS
THAT WERE PUT TOGETHER.
IT&apos;S NOT HISTORIC BECAUSE MORE
THAN 50 PERCENT OF THE OF THE
BUILDING WAS MOVED THERE AND
THE ONLY THING IN NINETEEN
FORTY FOUR THAT YOU WOULD HAVE
WOULD BE THE MACING AND THE AGE
OF THE BUILDING WHICH THE
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIORS
GUIDELINE SAYS IS NOT IN AND
OF ITSELF ENOUGH TO CALL A
BUILDING HISTORIC.
SO WE WERE SUCCESSFUL IN
GETTING IT DELISTED AS A
CONTRIBUTING RESOURCE AND FROM
THERE WE ARE JUST WE ARE KIND
OF KEEPING THE ORIGINAL
FOOTPRINT OF THE TWO HOUSES
THAT WERE PUT TOGETHER THERE IN
NINETEEN THIRTY AND AND THAT&apos;S
WHY THE BACK OF IT IS MORE
MODERN IS TO TRY AND SORT
OF WORKING WITH THE PEOPLE IN
THE NEIGHBORHOOD AND ESPECIALLY
THE ARCHITECTURAL HISTORIANS
THERE YOU KIND OF MAKE A HYPHEN
AND A DIFFERENT LOOKING
BUILDING IN THE BACK SO THAT IT
COULD SORT OF HAVE THE REMINDER
OF WHAT THE NEIGHBORHOOD USED
TO LOOK LIKE THE ROOFLINES WERE
DESIGNED TO MATCH THE
STREETSCAPE.
THE HEIGHT OF THE BUILDING
RIGHT NOW IS CONSIDERABLY LOWER
THAN THE OTHER BUILDINGS ALL ON
EITHER SIDE OF IT.
SO WE WE BROUGHT THAT UP TO
MATCH THAT BETTER SO THAT IT
WOULD LOOK MORE CONSISTENT WITH
THE REST OF THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
THAT&apos;S ONE ADDITIONAL THING I
DO WANT TO ADDRESS IS THAT
THERE IS NO THERE IS NO GARBAGE
TRUCKS.
ALL OF THE GARBAGE WILL BE OUT
AT THE STREET IN THE CONTAINERS
THE SAME AS SEEMS THAT THERE
WAS ALSO INSTITUTED STATIONS
INSIDE EACH APARTMENT THAT WILL
HELP PEOPLE GREATLY REDUCE
THEIR TRASH.
I WOULD HOPE CERTAINLY MAKING
IT EASIER FOR THEM NOT TO HAVE
TO CARRY STUFF OUT ALL THE TIME
AND I THINK I LIKE TREE
TRIMMING NOTES IF NEEDED BUT
TREE MAKING IS YEAH.
AND THEN WE&apos;RE REMOVING THE
TELEPHONE POLE OUT FRONT FOR
THAT REASON I HAVE TO YOU KNOW,
MAYBE IMPROVEMENT.
AH IT WAS INTERESTING TO SEE AT
LEAST IN THE STAFF REPORT THE
REQUIRED IN TERMS OF EXISTING
THE SORRY GO TO REAL QUICK
LOOKED LIKE IT WAS ACTUALLY THE
REQUIRED VERSUS PROPOSED THE
REQUIRED IS ACTUALLY THE
CURRENT NOT THE REQUIRED
BECAUSE IT SAYS NO BICYCLE
PARKING IS CURRENTLY REQUIRED
BUT THE PROPOSED IS CLASS BEING
CLASSY.
MY UNDERSTANDING A C FOR
MULTIFAMILY AND THERE&apos;S B AND C
BUT OF A SIGNIFICANT HIGHER
AMOUNT.
&gt;&gt; YEAH TWELVE MAXIMUM WE COULD
FIT IN THE BACK WAS TWELVE
UNDERNEATH THE OVERHANG AND
THEN THERE&apos;S A SOLAR ON IT
SOLAR PANEL AWNING TO KEEP THE
BIKES DRY AND MAKE IT SO THAT
THEY COULD BE PARKED OUTSIDE
AND LOCKED YEAR ROUND AND THEN
WE ALSO PUT IN FOR HOOPES AND
THOSE ARE HAVE AN ELECTRIC
CHARGING STATION SO THAT IF
ANYONE HAS AN ELECTRIC BIKE
THEY CAN CHARGE US TO THAT&apos;S A
GREAT SO THAT WAS KIND OF PART
OF MY ASK FOR THE EEVEE AND
VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS WAS
THAT THAT&apos;S A GREAT WAY TO
INCREASE YOUR CLASS B AND IF
YOU&apos;VE GOT A CONDUIT READY
MAYBE SOME TYPICAL OUTLETS IF
NOT FULL EV CHARGING STATIONS
TO TRANSITION FROM SIX VEHICLE
PARKING TO FETING EVEN MORE
BIKE SPACES WITHIN THE AREA.
SO AS A KIND OF LOWER LEVEL
IMPROVEMENT THAT CARPORT COULD
DO DOUBLE DUTY SINCE YOU DON&apos;T
ACTUALLY HAVE A PARKING MINIMUM
REQUIREMENTS OF THE SAME SITE.
INTERESTING IDEA.
I NEVER THOUGHT OF THAT AS A
CONSIDERATION ESPECIALLY
BECAUSE THE CLASS B IS ALL WALL
MOUNTED IN IF THERE&apos;S MORE THAN
FOUR E BIKES WHICH ARE JUST
KIND OF GROWING TREND.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, YOU COULDN&apos;T IT WOULD
BE VERY DIFFICULT TO PUT THOSE
ON THE VERTICAL WALL.
I ALSO MEAN IT&apos;S A QUESTION FOR
STAFF.
THERE&apos;S NO SET BACK MAXIMUM BUT
AS I READ ONE, THE BENEFITS
OF BRINGING AND ACTIVATING THE
STREET IS REDUCING THE SET BACK
TO THE FRONT AND
THE I&apos;M SORRY
THE SUBJECT TO THE FRONT IS
MEANT TO MATCH ALL OF THE IS
GOING SOUTH TO SO THE BUILDING
RIGHT NOW IS IT&apos;S REAL CLOSE TO
THE NORTH PROPERTY LINE AND
IT&apos;S ACTUALLY TURNED ABOUT 11
DEGREES FROM THE STREET.
SO IF YOU LOOK AT IT IT&apos;S KIND
OF LIKE IT&apos;S GOING ON THERE,
YOU KNOW SO WE&apos;RE ACTUALLY
TURNING IT BACK TO THE STREET
AND THEN MOVING IT AWAY FROM
THAT PROPERTY LINE.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M WONDERING BECAUSE THE
PUDI IS GOING TO STAY WITH THE
LAND, YOU KNOW, LIKE IF YOU&apos;D
PUT TOGETHER A NEW SITE
DEVELOPMENT IF WE ALSO THERE&apos;S
CURRENTLY A TEN FOOT MINIMUM
STEP BACK BUT MAYBE PUTTING THE
TWENTY FIVE FOOT SET BACK
MAXIMUM TO REQUIRE ANY PROPERTY
ON THIS PROJECT TO BE AT THE
STREET SAY IF THIS DESIGN
DOESN&apos;T GO FORWARD AND A NEW
PLAN SHOWS UP THAT IT CAN&apos;T BE
FURTHER THAN TWENTY FIVE FEET.
SO PUTTING A STEP BACK MAX BOMB
CONTINUES TO ENCOURAGE AND
REQUIRE A BUILDING PUSH FORWARD
TO THE STREET.
&gt;&gt; SO I MEAN I THINK THAT&apos;S
JUST KIND OF NATURALLY FITS
BEST ON THE STREET.
THE CORNWALL MANSION TO THE
NORTH IS ABOUT FIFTY OR SIXTY
FEET BACK WHICH IS A GRAND OLD
MANSION.
SO IT REALLY IT&apos;S AN ESTATE,
YOU KNOW AND IT LOOKS LIKE THAT
BUT YEAH, TO THE SOUTH IT&apos;S
JUST IT&apos;S VERY REGULAR.
WE MEASURED THEM ALL AND
THEY&apos;RE REALLY IN LINE AND THEN
YOU GET TO THIS ONE AND IT&apos;S
JUST KIND OF NOT YEAH.
&gt;&gt; SO YEAH THOSE ARE KIND
OF THE THINGS I&apos;D LIKE TO MAYBE
SEE AS CHANGES.
I&apos;M GOING TO OPEN THIS UP FOR
DISCUSSION BUT ADDING BACK
MAXIMUM JUST TO KIND OF OVERLAY
IN THIS PUDI AND I KNOW LIKE
RIGHT NOW THERE&apos;S A MINIMUM
BIKE PARKING THAT YOU HAVE ON
THE SITE BUT EVEN SAYING AND
YOU HAVE THE MAXIMUM VEHICLE
PARKING BUT YOU KNOW I&apos;D LIKE
TO SEE OPPORTUNITIES FOR THAT
RATIO TO CHANGE.
I THINK THE NUMBERS AS WRITTEN
IN THE PUDI GIVE YOU THE
FLEXIBILITY IN THAT CAR CARPORT
TO SWITCH OVER TO MORE CLASS B
BIKE PARKING BUT I WANTED TO
OFFER THAT AS AN IDEA AS WELL.
&gt;&gt; SO YOU WOULD SAY YOU TAKE
ONE OF THE CAR BAYS AND YOU CAN
PUT FOUR FOUR SIX PARKING SPOTS
SO THAT IS AN OPPORTUNITY I
DON&apos;T SEE AS AN AMENDMENT TO
THE PUDI BUT A MAXIMUM SETBACK
MIGHT BE SOMETHING I&apos;M NOT
GOING TO OFFER UP AS A
DISCUSSION POINT.
I THINK THOSE ARE MY QUESTIONS
FOR NOW.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU THAN ANYBODY ELSE
LIKE TO SPEAK.
COMMISSIONER.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR THIS
AND THANK YOU FOR ALSO LAYING
OUT THE TIMELINE.
&gt;&gt; I VAGUELY RECALL THE PUDI
MEETING BUT IT FELT SO LONG AGO
I COULDN&apos;T AND COVID WAS IT WAS
REALLY HARD TO PUT THAT IN TIME
THAT MAY HAVE BEEN BUSY.
I&apos;M NOT SURE IT WAS YEAH.
IT FEELS I MEAN I THINK IT WAS
PRE COVID RIGHT THEN.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
SO THANKS FOR THE STICK TO IT
LIVENESS AND FOR A DESIGN THAT
I THINK ENHANCED THIS CORRIDOR
AND DOESN&apos;T YOU KNOW THERE&apos;S
ELEMENTS THAT MAKE IT CLEAR
THAT IT DOES NOT DATE TO THE
HISTORIC DISTRICT BUT ALSO IS
NOT COMPLETELY OUT OF PLACE.
I I OFTEN GO THROUGH THE
SUPPLEMENTAL I CONCUR WITH
COMMISSIONER SAUVé THAT ONE
OF THE BENEFITS IS ABOUT
PULLING THINGS UP THAT OFFER
PUTTING IN A MAXIMUM THERE
MAKES A WHOLE LOT OF SENSE JUST
IN CASE SOMETHING HAPPENS TO
THIS PROJECT.
IT WOULD TIE ANY FUTURE
DEVELOPMENT TO THAT AND IT HAS
NO EFFECT RIGHT NOW.
&gt;&gt; I WOULD LIKE TO SAY TO JUST
BECAUSE IT&apos;S COOL AND THIS WAS
SHANNON&apos;S IDEA ACTUALLY BUT THE
HISTORIC COMMISSION WE USED TO
HAVE A KIND OF A GARDEN STEPS
GOING ON TO THAT THAT APARTMENT
AND THEY WANTED TO CHANGE THAT
WHICH WE WERE HAPPY TO DO.
BUT YOU KNOW, WE KIND OF TOOK
THE INSPIRATION FROM THE ST.
ANDREWS CHURCH UP THE BLOCK AND
ACTUALLY I HAVE THE SAME TYPE
OF STONE YOU CAN&apos;T SEE IT ON
THE HOUSE BUT IT IS JUST NOW.
BUT THE FOUNDATION IS A CUT CUT
BLOCK FOUNDATION ONE QUARTER
OF THE EXISTING FOUNDATION NOW
AND SO WE&apos;RE GOING TO USE THAT
AND BUILD THE MASONRY WALL OUT
FRONT AND THE REALLY THE IDEA
IS TO REALLY ACTIVATE THAT SPOT
AND MAKE A NICE SPOT FOR THE
TENANTS IN THE AND THE GARDEN
APARTMENT AND ALSO SOMETHING
THAT&apos;LL BRING SUNLIGHT IN AND
TO THE RIGHT IN THAT DOOR THERE
IS KIND LIKE THE COMMON SPACE,
THE KITCHEN AND THE LIVING ROOM
FOR THAT FOR THAT I THINK
THAT&apos;S YEAH.
I THINK IN TERMS OF DESIGN IT&apos;S
GREAT.
I WAS OFTEN YOU KNOW I KIND
OF COMPARE WHAT WE&apos;RE SEEING
VERSUS WHAT&apos;S IN THE DREGS AND
I DON&apos;T UNLESS I MISSED THIS
THIS IS FOR STAFF.
I DIDN&apos;T SEE ANYTHING ABOUT
HEIGHT WHICH I VAGUELY RECALL
LAST TIME TOO WHEN WE TALKED
ABOUT THIS SAYING LIKE IF
ANYTHING IN THE FUTURE WE MAY
WANT MORE LIKE NOT TYING
OURSELVES NECESSARILY TO THAT.
IS THAT AM I RECALLING THAT
RIGHT AND OR DID I MISS THAT IN
THE REGS LIKE I BELIEVE WE&apos;RE
BRINGING IT AND THIS IS
ACTUALLY FROM A ABRAM&apos;S I WAS
JUST GOING TO ASK CAN YOU ASK
THE PETITIONER TO PLEASE STOP
AND LET COMMISSIONER MILLS ASK
HER A QUESTION?
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S DIRECTED TO STAFF, NOT
TO YOU.
YEP.
MR. CHANG, IN TERMS OF THE
THERE&apos;S NO HEIGHT LIMIT IN
THERE.
RIGHT.
AND INSTEAD IT&apos;S KIND OF THE
FLOOR AREA.
IS THAT THE KIND OF THE
LIMITING FEATURE HERE?
YEAH, I BELIEVE THAT&apos;S CORRECT.
YEAH.
THESE ARE DRAFT SUPPLEMENTAL
REGULATIONS.
I HAVE NO PROBLEM PUTTING IN A
TWENTY FIVE FOOT MAX FRONT SET
BACK AND WE CAN SET ALSO A
MAXIMUM HEIGHT ON THE
STRUCTURE.
WE CAN ADD THAT IN THERE BEFORE
THIS GOES ON TO COUNCIL.
&gt;&gt; I DON&apos;T NECESSARILY KNOW
THAT IT&apos;S I&apos;M NOT BOTHERED BY
HEIGHT.
I&apos;M NOT I DON&apos;T FEEL LIKE
CONSTRAINING THAT IS SUPER
IMPORTANT.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT I
I&apos;M THINKING ABOUT THAT RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; I WOULD ADD THAT I KNOW ONE
OF THE ISSUES THAT MR. SELBY
HAD BROUGHT UP THAT THERE WERE
THERE WERE A LOT OF WHETHER IT
WAS UTILITIES OR DENSITY OR BUT
ONE OF THEM WAS MR. SELBY COULD
PROBABLY TELL YOU WE HAD FIRE
DEPARTMENT REVIEWS AND THERE
MIGHT BE ISSUES IF YOU WERE TO
RAISE THIS ROOF ANY MORE
BECAUSE WITH THE SOLAR PANELS
ON THERE THERE WERE THERE WERE,
YOU KNOW, FIRE ACCESS ISSUES.
SO I&apos;M NOT SURE EVEN IF HE
WANTED TO GO HIGHER THAT HE
WOULD BE ABLE TO GO HIGHER.
&gt;&gt; I HAVE I WAS GOING TO SAY
I&apos;VE GOT A LIST HERE I WANT TO
KNOW MORE ABOUT KIND OF YOUR
EXPERIENCE.
I DON&apos;T WANT TO LOSE SOMETHING
THOUGH.
LET ME GO BACK TO I NEED TO
WRITE IT DOWN SO I DON&apos;T FORGET
IT.
OK, WHILE WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT
THAT, I HAVE THE LIST WATER
MAIN I HEARD CAPRICIOUS PROCESS
THE COST ASSOCIATED WITH THIS.
CAN YOU TELL US MORE KIND ABOUT
BECAUSE THERE&apos;S BEEN A COUPLE
OF TIMES IN I THINK SINCE WE&apos;VE
SEEN YOU FOR THE KIND OF PRE
MEETING ON THE PVD WHERE WE
HAVE TALKED ABOUT HOW EITHER
REGULATION, ZONING REGULATIONS
OR OTHER DEVELOPMENT PROCESSES
ARE IMPACTING MODEST SIZED
PROJECTS, SMALL MEDIUM SIZED
PROJECTS.
AND SO I&apos;M CURIOUS SOME
OF THOSE THINGS WE TRIED TO
REMEDY BUT NOT NECESSARILY BE
IN PADS.
CAN YOU TALK SPECIFICALLY ABOUT
LIKE THERE&apos;S SOMETHING IN THE
ZONING ORDINANCE THAT THAT
SERVED AS A HINDRANCE OR WHEN
YOU SAID TALKED BEFORE ABOUT
KIND OF THESE OTHER THE OTHER
EXPERIENCES LIKE CAN YOU CAN
YOU HELP US BETTER UNDERSTAND
KIND OF WHAT MADE THIS SO HARD
AND LONG AND EXPENSIVE?
&gt;&gt; WELL, FIRST OF ALL, IT TOOK
A LONG TIME SO TWICE THERE WAS
SOME NEW RULE THAT CAME UP THE
MEANT THAT WE WERE GOING TO
THAT IT WAS NO LONGER VIABLE.
AND SO WE WENT INTO THIS MAJOR
YOU KNOW, KIND OF LIKE OH WELL
WE CAN&apos;T DO THE PROJECT NOW
BECAUSE WHAT WAS A RULE BEFORE
IS NOW OR WAS NOT A RULE BEFORE
IS NOT A RULE.
&gt;&gt; DO YOU REMEMBER WHAT THOSE
RULES WERE?
WELL, ONE WAS THAT WE NEEDED TO
IS CAME UP.
THIS IS ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
MADE THE PROJECT TAKE ANOTHER
YEAR WAS THAT IT CAME UP THAT
WE WERE GOING TO NEED TO HAVE
LOW INCOME HOUSING AS WELL
WHICH FOR OUR FOUR UNIT
BUILDING JUST I&apos;M SORRY IT JUST
DOESN&apos;T WORK.
AND SO THE CITY&apos;S RESPONSE WAS
YOU CAN PAY TWO HUNDRED AND
SIXTY THOUSAND DOLLARS AND GET
AROUND IT AND THAT DIDN&apos;T WORK
EITHER.
I&apos;M RIGHT ON THE EDGE OF BEING
ABLE TO AFFORD THIS AS IT IS SO
BUT THAT TOOK ABOUT TWO MONTHS
TO TO RESOLVE AND AND TO THIS
DAY I BELIEVE THAT THAT
ORDINANCE WAS MIS SO THAT
CAUSED A YEAR DELAY AS A RESULT
AND I&apos;D HAVE TO GO BACK AND
LOOK AT IT.
BUT THERE&apos;S BEEN A COUPLE
OF THINGS LIKE THAT WHERE
REGULATION CHANGE I THINK THE
PROBABLY THE BIGGEST THING
THOUGH IS THAT AND I KIND
OF GET THIS FROM THE WHOLE
PANDEMIC THING HAPPENING TO
SOME EXTENT.
BUT YOU KNOW, I USED TO BE ABLE
TO COME DOWN TO THE CITY AND
SIT DOWN WITH TWO OR THREE
PEOPLE AND TALK TO THEM FACE TO
FACE AND WE WOULD BARTER IT OUT
AND FIGURE OUT HOW TO GET PAST
AN ISSUE AND YOU JUST CAN&apos;T DO
THAT ANYMORE AND AND AND IT
FEELS LIKE EVERYBODY&apos;S IN THEIR
SILO AND THAT&apos;S THEIR ISSUE IS
THE MOST IMPORTANT ISSUE
BECAUSE THAT&apos;S WHAT THEY DO FOR
THEIR JOB EVERY DAY AND I GET
THAT.
BUT WHAT ENDS UP HAPPENING IS
THAT YOU HAVE THIS PERSON WHO
WANTS THIS AND THIS PERSON
WANTS THAT AND THEY ARE
MUTUALLY EXCLUSIVE AND THERE&apos;S
JUST DOESN&apos;T SEEM TO BE THE
SAME ABILITY FOR PEOPLE TO GET
TOGETHER AND SAY HEY, HOW ARE
WE GOING TO SOLVE THIS?
YOU KNOW, LIKE I FEEL LIKE THIS
PROJECT COULD HAVE BEEN IN THE
EXACT SAME FORM WAS WITHIN
ABOUT SIX MONTHS IF WE HAD HAD
THAT OPPORTUNITY TO SORT OF GO
THROUGH THESE AND SAY WHAT IS
IMPORTANT TO THE CITY?
IS IT THAT THERE&apos;S ROOM FOR
ENOUGH CONTAINERS OUT IN THE
STREET OR IS THE LANDMARK TRIO
IN FRONT MORE IMPORTANT?
YOU KNOW, SO IT&apos;S IT&apos;S JUST
IT&apos;S EXPENSIVE.
IT&apos;S REALLY TIME CONSUMING
BECAUSE EVERY TIME ONE OF THOSE
THINGS COMES UP
A COUPLE
OF MONTHS AND I JUST FEEL LIKE
THERE NEEDS TO BE BETTER
COMMUNICATION OVERALL.
&gt;&gt; SO COMPETING DEMANDS BETWEEN
DIFFERENT DEPARTMENTS ARE
DIFFERENT KIND OF SERVICES IS
THAT YEAH.
&gt;&gt; AND I FEEL LIKE THERE SHOULD
BE SOMEBODY THAT SORT OF IS IN
CHARGE OF THE PROCESS THAT HAS
THE ABILITY TO WORK BETWEEN SAY
ENGINEERING AND PLANNING THINGS
LIKE THAT OR IS WHERE THINGS GO
AWRY AND IT&apos;S REALLY HARD TO
GET OVER THEM NOW ESPECIALLY
WHEN YOU&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT
DEALING OVER EMAIL AND IT&apos;S
JUST IT&apos;S EASIER FOR PEOPLE TO
GET DOUG IN.
&gt;&gt; I DON&apos;T KNOW THOSE ARE THOSE
ARE SOME OF THE THINGS I JUST I
FEEL LIKE THERE NEEDS TO BE
SOMEBODY IN THE CITY THAT CAN
TAKE A PROJECT AND SAY OK, I&apos;M
GOING TO PUT ALL THESE PEOPLE
TOGETHER AND WE&apos;RE GOING TO
FIGURE OUT HOW YOU KNOW, IF
THIS IS IMPORTANT TO THE CITY.
LET&apos;S FIGURE OUT HOW TO GET
WHAT WE NEED OUT OF IT AND MAKE
SURE THAT YOU KNOW THAT THE THE
PERSON WHO WAS PUTTING THE
PROJECT TOGETHER KNOWS WHAT
THEY&apos;RE SUPPOSED TO DO BECAUSE
TIME GOES ON AND THINGS CHANGE
AND THEN YOU&apos;RE HAVING TO GO
AND REDO YOUR PROJECT AGAIN.
AND I&apos;VE HAD THAT HAPPEN ON
THIS ONE TO TRY TO FIGURE OUT A
NEW WAY TO BUILD IT AND ALL
THAT&apos;S JUST EXPENSIVE.
THANK YOU.
ONE MORE QUESTION FOR YOU
BEFORE I HAVE A COUPLE FOR
STAFF AND THIS IS PRIOR TO
CHANGING THE PARKING
REQUIREMENTS, WE I, I AT LEAST
DON&apos;T WANT TO SPEAK FOR
EVERYBODY ELSE WAS LED TO
BELIEVE THAT IT WAS REALLY THE
PARKING REQUIREMENTS, PARKING
MINIMUMS THAT WERE DRIVING SIX
BEDROOM UNITS IN THE CITY THAT
BECAUSE PARKING WAS TIRED TIED
TO THE NUMBER OF UNITS DIDN&apos;T
MAKE A DIFFERENCE.
IF YOU HAD A ONE BEDROOM OR SIX
BEDROOM YOU HAD TO PROVIDE THE
SAME AMOUNT OF PARKING AND SO
THAT WAS REALLY DRIVING SIX
BEDROOM UNITS.
BUT YOU DON&apos;T HAVE ANY PARKING
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS AND WE&apos;RE
STILL SEEING SIX BEDROOM UNITS
SO CAN YOU HELP EXPLAIN WHY?
&gt;&gt; WELL, I TRIED REALLY, REALLY
HARD TO MAKE ALL OF OUR FORESE
REQUIREMENTS SO THE THE THE
VARIANCES THAT EXISTED WERE
PRETTY MINOR IN NATURE.
FOR INSTANCE, THE THE BUILDING
DOES MEET A HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
FOR FOR THE ZONING AND AT THE
TIME WHEN I STARTED IT WE
NEEDED SIX PARKING SPOTS.
WELL THAT&apos;S WHAT WE HAVE SO NOT
A PROBLEM AND WE HAD PLANNED TO
PUT CHARGING STATIONS OUT THERE
FROM THE VERY BEGINNING ANYWAY
.
BUT THAT&apos;S WHERE WE THAT&apos;S
WHERE IT STARTED ABOUT FIVE
YEARS AGO THERE WAS A PARKING
REQUIREMENT.
I DON&apos;T MIND HAVING THAT
PARKING THERE.
I KNOW SOME PEOPLE ARE STILL
GOING TO HAVE CARS BUT BUT IT
JUST YOU KNOW, AT THE TIME
THERE WAS WE WERE TRYING TO HEW
AS CLOSELY AS WE COULD TO WHAT
THE OUR FORESE REGULATIONS WERE
BECAUSE WE DIDN&apos;T YOU KNOW, WE
JUST WANTED THOSE HANDFUL
OF VARIANCES TO BE PRETTY MINOR
IN NATURE AND YOU KNOW, NOT
SOMETHING THAT WOULD KILL THE
PROJECT.
OK, SO SIX BEDROOM UNITS ARE
RENTABLE I GUESS THAT&apos;S THE
FUNDAMENTAL QUESTION LIKE
BEFORE WE HEARD THERE&apos;S A
BIGGER MARKET FOR SMALL UNIT
LIKE SMALLER BEDROOM UNITS BUT
THAT&apos;S NOT YOU&apos;RE NOT WORRIED
ABOUT RENTING THIS WITH SIX
MINUTES?
&gt;&gt; NO.
AND TALKING TO TO ONE OF THE
LANDLORDS IS ABOUT ONE HUNDRED
UNITS AROUND KOREATOWN.
THIS IS KIND OF HOW HE DOES
DOES IT TOO.
AND HE SAID HE LIKED HIS SIX
BEDROOMS.
&gt;&gt; BUT THIS IS KIND OF FUNNY
BECAUSE HE SAID THAT FOUR IS
THE WORST BECAUSE THERE CANNOT
LIVE WITH FOR A TYRANT CAN
ARISE AND WITH SIX THERE&apos;S
ANOTHER FACTION THAT WILL BEAT
THE TYRANT.
&gt;&gt; OK, SO I&apos;M LIKE THAT&apos;S
FASCINATING FROM A HUMAN
STANDPOINT.
BUT ANYWAY, THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S WHERE
WE ORIGINALLY GOT THE IDEA FROM
HAS A LOT OF SUCCESS WITH A SIX
BEDROOM UNIT.
&gt;&gt; OK, THANK YOU.
I THINK THE REST OF THE
QUESTIONS THAT I HAVE ARE FOR
MR. CHANG.
SO MR. GOING BACK TO THE
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS I JUST
WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
EFFECTIVELY WHAT&apos;S IN SECTION
THREE WHERE IT TALKS ABOUT THE
BENEFITS, THE LAST BULLET AND D
THIS BUILDING IS TO BE A NET
ZERO ENERGY ALL ELECTRIC
BUILDING THAT IS WHAT&apos;S TITLED
THAT IS REQUIRED NO MATTER WHAT
HAPPENS THAT THAT THEY&apos;RE TIED
TO MAKING SURE THAT HOWEVER
WHATEVER THE FLEXIBILITY IN
TERMS OF THE FLOOR AREA,
WHATEVER THE HEIGHT ULTIMATELY
ANYBODY IF WE APPROVE THIS AS
THE NEXT PERSON IS TIED TO THAT
IS THAT RIGHT?
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S
CORRECT.
OK, AND THEN SIMILARLY THEY&apos;D
BE TIED TO THE BENEFITS
OF UTILIZING THE CARPORT AND
ROOF TO INSTALL SOLAR PANELS
AND YOU&apos;RE REALLY EXPLICIT IN
TERMS OF LIKE THE NUMBER
OF PANELS I FEEL LIKE MAYBE
YES.
&gt;&gt; THE NUMBER OF PANELS I JUST
IT WAS IN SECTION FOUR IT&apos;S
CLEAR ABOUT THE NUMBER
OF PANELS.
I JUST DIDN&apos;T NECESSARILY SEE
ANYTHING AND MAYBE I NEED TO
CONTROL F HERE THAT LIKE
EXPLICITLY BANNED THE NATURAL
GAS CONNECTION.
IS THAT UNLESS I MISSED THAT
AND WE CAN WE CAN FIRM THAT UP
AND IN THE SUPPLEMENTAL REGS I
THINK THAT WOULD SUGGEST TO ME
THAT IT&apos;S NOT JUST YOU KNOW,
HERE ARE THE GOALS BUT LIKE
GIVE OUT A LITTLE BIT MORE
TEETH WITHIN SECTION FOUR I
WOULD FEEL MUCH MORE
COMFORTABLE AND THAT&apos;S THE
INTENTION, RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S I WILL NOT PUT
NATURAL GAS HOSTS THAT I BUILD
GREAT.
&gt;&gt; AND AND THE ONLY OTHER THING
THAT I HAVE FOR YOU, MR. CHANG
IS FROM YOU MENTIONED KIND
OF FIRE MARSHALL AND IN THE
STAFF REPORT THERE APPEARED TO
BE SOME COMMENTS AT I THINK
FROM FORESTRY THAT IT&apos;S STILL
UNCOMFORTABLE POTENTIALLY WITH
THIS.
SO MAYBE COULD YOU CAN YOU SHED
SOME ADDITIONAL LIGHT ON HOW
FROM YOUR PERSPECTIVE THIS WHAT
ARE SOME OF THE BOTTLENECKS
THAT THIS PROJECT EXPOSES IN
TERMS OF GETTING MORE PROJECTS
LIKE THIS?
&gt;&gt; SURE.
I&apos;LL GO BACK TO IT.
JUST TOUCH ON THE ZONING.
THE UNDERLYING ZONING IS OUR
FORESEE AND SO YOU&apos;LL SEE A LOT
OF SIX BEDROOM UNITS BECAUSE
OUR CODE ALLOWS FOR SIX
UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS TO LIVE
IN THE AIR FORCE.
SEE IF THIS WERE ZONED ARE ONE
OR TWO WHICH ARE SIMILAR TO
FAMILY, YOU COULD ONLY HAVE
FOUR INDIVIDUALS LIVING IN EACH
UNIT SO IT ALL DEPENDS ON THE
ZONING DISTRICT.
SO THAT&apos;S HOW YOU&apos;RE GOING TO
SEE WHY THERE&apos;S EITHER FOUR
UNITS AND SOME THAT ARE
PROPOSED AND SIX AND OTHERS
IT&apos;S PROBABLY HAS MORE TO DO
WITH THE UNDERLYING ZONING THAN
ANYTHING ELSE TO TRY TO
PROBABLY MAXIMIZE YOUR DENSITY
AS FAR AS WITH THE WITH THE
FORESTRY, YOU KNOW, I DID HAVE
SOME DISCUSSION.
YOU KNOW, FROM THE FORESTERS
PERSPECTIVE YOU YOU COULD
ALMOST SAY WELL MAY BE THIS IS
SELF-IMPOSED BECAUSE YOU&apos;RE
YOU&apos;RE MAKING THIS A BIGGER YOU
KNOW, GOING FROM THREE THOUSAND
SQUARE FOOT, YOU KNOW YOU KNOW
FOR UNIT COMPLEX TO SOMETHING
THAT&apos;S NINE THOUSAND WELL AND
THE THINKING IS WELL YOU&apos;RE
KIND OF SELF-IMPOSED.
YOU COULD HAVE MADE SOMETHING
SMALLER AND MOVE THAT THAT THAT
REPORT BACK TEN MORE FEET SO IT
MEETS THE FIFTEEN FEET I PUT IT
HOPEFULLY IT WAS IN THE STAFF
REPORT.
I THINK AT THE END OF MY
DISGUISE AT LEAST FROM MY
COMMENTS AS WELL.
THAT&apos;S WHY IT&apos;S A PUDI WE&apos;RE
GOING TO HAVE FLEXIBILITY SO WE
CAN HAVE YOU KNOW IT&apos;S
ESSENTIALLY IT&apos;S SCREENING FROM
PARKING LOT SO IT&apos;S JUST A
SURFACE PARKING LOT AND IF YOU
KIND OF LOOK AT THE ELEVATIONS,
THE CARPORT REALLY DOES IF
YOU&apos;RE AT GROUND LEVEL SCREEN
FROM FROM THAT PARKING OUT.
SO I LOOKED AT IT THE SENSE
EVEN IF YOU WERE TO MOVE THAT
CARPORT MAYBE ANOTHER 10 FEET
TO GIVE YOU THE 15 FOOT WITH
AND YOU WERE GOING PLANT, YOU
KNOW, SOME DECIDUOUS TREES OR
SOMETHING IN THERE, I&apos;M NOT
SURE YOU&apos;RE GOING TO GET ANY
MORE SCREENING BUT YOU HAVE
SCREENING FOR RESIDENTIAL.
YOU&apos;RE SCREENING FROM A SURFACE
PARKING LOT SO I CAN SEE WHERE
THE FORRESTERS COMING FROM.
BUT I ALSO THINK WITH THE
FLEXIBILITY OF THE PD THAT THEY
DOING THE BEST THEY CAN THEY
ARE PUTTING IN A FIVE FOOT
SLIVER IN THERE.
THEY ARE PUTTING UP A FOUR FOOT
FENCE IN THERE ALONG WITH THE
CARPORT.
THE SCREEN.
BUT AGAIN WE&apos;LL HAVE TO MAKE
THAT DECISION.
WOULD YOU RATHER HAVE A SETBACK
FURTHER SO YOU CAN SCREEN A
PARKING LOT THAT&apos;S REALLY WHAT
IT COMES DOWN TO IT I I WOULD
SAY THAT I&apos;M IN FAVOR
OF LEAVING IT THE SCREENING OR
AT LEAST THE THE SUPPLEMENTAL
REGS THAT IT&apos;S JUST A FIVE FOOT
SETBACK TO THE EAST OF THE
PARKING LOT.
ONE POINT OF CLARIFICATION I
THINK WHEN YOU STARTED OUT BY
TALKING ABOUT THE UNDERLYING
ZONING AND SIX BEDROOMS ARE
UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS IN IN
KIND OF THE MULTIPHASE
DISTRICTS BUT WE&apos;RE CREATING A
NEW ZONING DISTRICT HERE SO
THEY&apos;RE NOT BEHOLDEN TO THAT.
SO I&apos;M CURIOUS LIKE THAT&apos;S OR
IS IT ARE YOU SUGGESTING THAT
THEY&apos;RE BEHOLDEN TO IT BECAUSE
IF THEY HAD TWENTY FOUR
BEDROOMS IN EIGHT UNITS SO
INSTEAD HAD THREE BEDROOM UNITS
THAT THAT WOULD THEN TRIGGER
THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
COMPONENT BECAUSE THEY WOULD BE
EXCEEDING OK SO YOU CAN&apos;T SAY
SO IN ORDER FOR THE THE MONEY
THE KIND OF THE NUMBERS TO WORK
OUT THEY CAN EXCEED THE NUMBER
OF UNITS EVEN THOUGH IT WOULD
BE THE SAME NUMBER OF BEDROOMS
WHICH IS ANOTHER THING THAT&apos;S
CRAZY.
I GOT I GOT LISTS NOW BE READY
FOR OUR COMMISSION PROPOSED
BUSINESS.
THANK YOU.
OK JUST WANTED TO TALK ABOUT
MAKE SURE I WASN&apos;T BEING CRAZY
AND I&apos;LL JUST SAY SO THE PEOPLE
KNOW WHY I&apos;M BRINGING THIS UP
LATER CONFLICTING LAND USE
BUFFERS HAVEN&apos;T COME UP IN A IN
A HOT MINUTE I FEEL LIKE NOT
LIKE IMMEDIATELY BUT THEY COME
UP A LOT THEY HAVE COME UP A
LOT SO I THINK THAT NEEDS TO GO
BACK ON OUR WORK PLAN SOMEWHERE
.
&gt;&gt; OK, THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
COMMISSIONER EVANS.
&gt;&gt; SURE.
COMMISSIONER, COULD I
TEMPERATURE APRON&apos;S YEAH
.
SO I JUST WANT TO BE CLEAR I
HAVE A I I HAVE A DIFFERENT
PERSPECTIVE.
I DISAGREE WITH WHAT CITY
PLANNER CHANG SAID.
I WANT TO BE CLEAR ABOUT THE
ENERGY EFFICIENCY ASPECTS
OF THIS.
THOSE ARE NOT A REQUIREMENT IN
THE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT.
THE ONLY REQUIREMENT CURRENTLY
IS THAT SOLAR CAPACITY BE
INSTALLED BECAUSE THE
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS DO NOT
TIE ONLY THIS PLAN THAT IS IT&apos;S
ONLY REFERENCING THAT PLAN THIS
THIS APPROVED SITE PLAN HAS
THOSE COMPONENTS.
BUT IF THESE ARE ADOPTED, A NEW
PLAN THEORETICALLY COULD COME
AND IT WOULD BE MEASURED
AGAINST SUPPLEMENTAL
REGULATIONS NOT THAT SITE PLAN
.
WE&apos;VE TALKED ABOUT THIS
PREVIOUSLY, PARTICULARLY WHEN
WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT A ENERGY
EFFICIENCY STANDARD THAT IS
MEASURED OVER TIME.
I DON&apos;T KNOW THAT IT&apos;S
APPROPRIATE TO PUT THAT IN A
PLAN UNIT DEVELOPMENT STANDARD
BECAUSE IF THE REQUIREMENT IS
THIS THAT THIS IS NET ZERO, THE
PROJECT IS REALIZED AND AT YEAR
TWO OR TEN OR TWENTY IT IS NOT
NET ZERO ONE.
I DON&apos;T KNOW THAT THAT IS A
MEASUREMENT THAT THE CITY WANTS
TO GET THE BUSINESS OF DOING
AND TO WHAT IS THE CONSEQUENCE
AT THAT TIME.
SO IF THERE IS A DESIRE TO ADD
A REQUIREMENT OF CERTIFICATION
,I WOULD REALLY EMPHASIZE THAT
IT BE SOMETHING THAT IS A
SNAPSHOT IN TIME, NOT SOMETHING
THAT REQUIRES AN ONGOING
PERFORMANCE WHICH ANY STANDARD
AROUND THAT ZERO OR LEAD TO MY
UNDERSTANDING WOULD OFTEN COME
INTO PLAY.
&gt;&gt; SO PROHIBITING NATURAL GAS
AN EASY CONDITION TO ADD THAT&apos;S
SOMETHING THAT CAN BE
DEFINITELY TO BE ATTAINED.
AND THEN JUST THERE WAS SOME
THERE WAS SOME CONVERSATION.
I APPRECIATE MR. SELBY&apos;S
FRUSTRATION.
I WANT TO OWN THAT PART OF THAT
WAS ME THE INTERPRETATION
OF THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
REQUIREMENT.
MY RECORDS SHOWED THAT THAT WAS
A CONVERSATION THAT I HAD WITH
MR. SELBY BETWEEN JANUARY 28TH
AND FEBRUARY 9TH OF TWENTY
TWENTY TWO WHEN THIS PERMIT
CAME IN WHEN THIS APPLICATION
CAME IN AND THE PRIEST
SUBMITTAL PRE PETITION MEETING
AT THE PLANNING COMMISSION WAS
PRESENTED TO YOU ON NOVEMBER
10TH TWENTY TWENTY.
SO THERE WAS ALSO A QUESTION
ABOUT WHEN THAT CAME TO THIS
BOARD SO I JUST WANT TO GIVE
SOME OF THOSE TIMING ASPECTS AS
WELL FOLLOWING UP ON THAT.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU BOTH FOR BRINGING
THAT UP AND I THINK NATURAL GAS
GETS US HALF THE WAY THERE BY
YES I IT&apos;S IT WAS A LONG TIME
AGO THAT WE HAD THIS DISCUSSION
RIGHT ABOUT NOT LIKE ABOUT THIS
DO YOU HAVE I DON&apos;T KNOW WHEN
THE CONVERSATION WAS ABOUT THE
PROBLEMS WE&apos;VE HAD IT
PERIODICALLY.
&gt;&gt; YEAH I&apos;M CURIOUS TYING SOME
SORT OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY
MEASURE IN HERE SEEMS WISE TO
ME AND I AM BOTH DEFERRING TO
SOME OF YOUR EXPERTIZE BECAUSE
I KNOW THAT THIS IS ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT YOU BUT ALSO TO
STAFF IN TERMS IS IT LIKE WHAT
IS THE MEASURE A C I DON&apos;T KNOW
WHAT THE BLOWER DOOR TEST YOU
WANT TO GET TO A LOW NUMBER
LIKE RIGHT BELOW TWO OR
SOMETHING.
I DON&apos;T KNOW.
&gt;&gt; IS THAT THE RIGHT MEASURE
THAT WE WOULD WANT TO USE OR OR
AND MAYBE THIS IS DEFERRING
BECAUSE I THINK THAT THAT&apos;S
REALLY IMPORTANT TO LIKE THAT
THE NEXT PERSON NOT JUST HAVE
NATURAL GAS BUT THAT THEY DO
SOMETHING HAS THE BUILDING THAT
KIND OF IS NOT BLOWN THROUGH
ELECTRIC HEATING IF THIS ONE
DOESN&apos;T GET BUILT.
&gt;&gt; SO GO AHEAD.
IF I CAN MAKE ANY KIND
RECOMMENDATIONS HERE PASSIVE
STANDARDS ARE ZERO POINT SIX
FIFTY WHICH MEANS A BUILDING&apos;S
UNDER FIFTY PARTICLES
OF PRESSURE AND OR
DEPRESSURIZATION AND SO THAT&apos;S
YOUR LEAKAGE TEST TO GET TO A
PASSIVE STANDARD PERSONALLY IF
SOMEBODY IS NOT SEEKING PASSIVE
STANDARDS I WOULD ALWAYS TRY TO
GET THERE.
BUT ANYTHING BELOW ONE IS A
VERY GOOD RESULT.
I WOULD ALSO SAY NO NATURAL GAS
THAT&apos;S A GIMME AND THEN IT&apos;S
IT&apos;S NOT THERE THERE IS VARIOUS
SOFTWARES YOU CAN USE TO FIGURE
OUT YOUR ANNUAL ENERGY
CONSUMPTION CAN&apos;T DO THAT WITH
NATURAL GAS.
BUT IF YOU HAVE AN ALL ELECTRIC
BUILDING AND ONE OF THOSE IS A
SOFTWARE CALLED WOOFY THAT THE
PASSIVE HEALTH STANDARD USES TO
BASICALLY DO THE MATH ON THE
BUILDING AND THAT IS WHAT I&apos;VE
USED HERE.
NOW ONE THING I DO NOT HAVE
CONTROL OF IS SOMEBODY MIGHT
DECIDE TO I MEAN I THINK IT
WOULD BE STUPID IF THEY DID BUT
THEY MIGHT DECIDE THEY WANT IT.
NINETY DEGREES IN THE ROOM TO
LEAVE A SPACE HEATER ON OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT CAN&apos;T
CONTROL THAT RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; BUT WHAT I CAN CONTROL IS
THAT WE KNOW THAT UNDER THESE
PARAMETERS THE BUILDING&apos;S
OPERATION THIS IS HOW MUCH IT
WILL USE AND WE WENT ACTUALLY
TEN PERCENT ABOVE THAT BUT I&apos;M
CALLING IT FIVE AS A SAFETY
FACTOR KNOWING IT THAT&apos;S HOW
YOU&apos;VE DESIGNED IT.
COOL.
I&apos;M TRYING TO THINK ABOUT AGAIN
LIKE HOW WE CAN ENSURE THAT THE
FUTURE LIKE HOW WE TIE IT INTO
HERE.
SO MY SENSE IS I&apos;M GLAD THAT
THE LIKE THE I DIDN&apos;T WRITE IT
DOWN BUT IT&apos;S OK THAT SEEMS
LIKE A REASONABLE THING BUT
ALSO DEFER TO OTHERS IN TERMS
OF THE I&apos;M THINKING BACK TO THE
PRESENTATIONS, THE WEBINARS TO
FROM THE ENERGY COMMISSION WITH
THE PASSIVE GUY IN PENNSYLVANIA
.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
TIM O&apos;BRIEN EXACTLY.
SO AND I FEEL LIKE THAT SEEMS
LIKE THE RIGHT NO I DON&apos;T KNOW
I DON&apos;T KNOW MR. LOUGHNER OR
MR. CHANG IF IT MAKES SENSE.
I&apos;M LESS IT&apos;S LESS IMPORTANT TO
ME THAT IT&apos;S A SPECIFIC PROGRAM
AND MORE LIKE THE METRIC THAT&apos;S
ASSOCIATED WITH IT.
AND I WOULD ALSO FEEL
COMFORTABLE WITH YOU GUYS
WORKING OUT WHAT THE RIGHT
NUMBER IS OR THE RIGHT LANGUAGE
AFTER US.
BUT WHAT DO YOU ALL THINK?
WHAT ARE THE TWO OF YOU THINK
ON THAT FOR MY SONS I&apos;M
COMFORTABLE WITH THAT.
WHAT I WOULD TAKE THAT
INSTRUCTION IS IS THAT THE
AMOUNT OF REGULATIONS WOULD BE
MODIFIED TO INCLUDE A ENERGY
EFFICIENCY STANDARD.
I WOULD PROBABLY WORK CLOSELY
WITH OUR OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY AND OUR
BUILDING DEPARTMENT TO
DETERMINE WHAT THAT POINT AND
BEST POINT IN TIME MEASURE IS
AND WE WOULD JUST REPORT THAT
OUT TO THE CITY COUNCIL WHEN
THIS PETITION PROCEEDED TO THE
CITY COUNCIL THAT THAT WAS
ADDED SINCE PLANNING COMMISSION
ARRIVED AND THE BASIS FOR
SELECTING THE STANDARD THAT WE
DID GREAT.
OK, SO TO MY KNOWLEDGE JUST FOR
EVERYBODY ELSE&apos;S BENEFIT
CONTINUE CONVERSATIONS I GOT
THREE THINGS THAT IT SOUNDS
LIKE AT LEAST THREE THINGS WE
TALKED ABOUT CHANGING IN HERE.
&gt;&gt; CAN I CAN I QUICKLY I I
THINK IT WOULD BE REALLY SMART
IF THE CITY WOULD UTILIZE SOME
OF THE EXPERTS IN THIS FIELD TO
HELP THEM DEVISE AND DESIGN
REGULATIONS AROUND THAT RATHER
THAN KIND OF DOING IT IN A
VACUUM.
THERE ARE CERTAIN PARAMETERS TO
ANY BUILDING AND IT&apos;S HARD TO
GET A ONE SIZE FITS ALL
APPROACH.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
ANYTHING ELSE, MR. LEARNER?
OK, COMMISSIONER.
&gt;&gt; WELL THAT WAS REALLY HELPFUL
BECAUSE I WAS GOING I WAS GOING
TO ASK WHETHER THE ENERGY
EFFICIENCY FEATURES WERE IN THE
SUPPLEMENTAL REGS AND IF THEY
COULD BE AND SO YOU GUYS JUST
HAD THAT WHOLE DISCUSSION AND I
REALLY APPRECIATE THAT I I
WANTED TO THANK THE ALL OF THE
PARTICIPANTS IN THE PUBLIC
DISCUSSION AND I WANTED TO
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THAT THAT
THERE ARE CLEARLY DIFFERENT
FEELINGS ABOUT THIS PROJECT IN
AMONG THOSE IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
.
I VERY MUCH APPRECIATED HEARING
THAT YOU WILL BE USING CURBSIDE
TRASH COLLECTION SO SOME OF THE
CONCERNS THAT HAVE BEEN RAISED
ABOUT DETRIMENTAL EFFECT ON THE
NEIGHBORHOOD MAY HAVE BEEN
BASED ON A MISUNDERSTANDING
ABOUT HOW TRASH WILL BE
COLLECTED.
UM, IT IS REALLY IMPORTANT TO
VALUE AND PRESERVE OUR OLD
FOURTH WARD HISTORIC DISTRICT
BUT THIS BUILDING IS IT WOULD
SEEM REALLY UNREASONABLE TO
IMAGINE RESTORING THIS BUILDING
TO A CONDITION IT KIND OF WAS
NEVER IN IN THE FIRST PLACE.
SO I DON&apos;T EVEN KNOW WHAT ONE
WOULD USE TO RESTORE A BUILDING
TO A MODEL OF THE 1830 WHEN
MOST OF IT WAS MOVED THERE THE
40S.
SO I UNDERSTAND I UNDERSTAND
THE VALUE OF THIS DISTRICT.
I REPRESENT THIS DISTRICT.
I AM SO PLEASED TO HEAR CHRIS
CROCKETT CALL IN AND AFFIRM THE
WORK THAT YOU DID WITH THE OLD
FOURTH WARD AND ALSO EVERYTHING
YOU WENT THROUGH TO TO TO BE
SURE THAT THIS IS A
NONCONTRIBUTING PLACE SO THAT
YOU CAN MODIFY IT.
WE WOULDN&apos;T BE SEEING YOU IF
THAT WEREN&apos;T TRUE.
WE WOULDN&apos;T BE SEEING YOU HERE.
THIS IS NOT GERMANE BUT I
WANTED ONCE AGAIN TO REASSURE
CHRIS CROCKETT IF SHE&apos;S STILL
ON THE LINE THAT KINGSLEY IS IN
THE SKYPE.
THAT&apos;S OUR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS
PLAN.
THAT&apos;S WHERE WE SCHEDULE THINGS
WE&apos;RE REALLY GOING TO DO IT&apos;S
IN THERE FOR 2024 AND IT&apos;S
ALIGNED WITH A WATER MAIN
REPLACEMENT AND SO THAT&apos;S
PROBABLY A GOOD THING FOR YOU,
MR. SELBY, BECAUSE IT&apos;S IN YOUR
AREA.
BUT SHE DID RAISE THAT CONCERN
WHEN SHE CALLED AND I HATE TO
LET A CONSTITUENT AGONIZE WHEN
WE DO HAVE AN ANSWER FOR HER.
SO I WAS ALSO GOING TO ASK
ABOUT BIKE PARKING BUT LISA
ALREADY DID THAT.
I MEAN SORRY COMMISSIONER SAUVé
ALREADY DID THAT SO I AM YOU
KNOW, I AM I AM THRILLED TO BE
IN THE POSITION WHERE A
PETITIONER LECTURES US ABOUT
THE NEED TO MEET SUSTAINABILITY
GOALS RATHER THAN THE OTHER WAY
AROUND.
&gt;&gt; AND I REALLY LOOK FORWARD TO
SEEING THIS PROJECT
.
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER.
THANK YOU.
FIRST I JUST WANT TO ADDRESS
THE PUBLIC THANK YOU FOR
PARTICIPATING AND THE FEEDBACK
AND I DIDN&apos;T CATCH YOUR LAST
NAME AND MCKENRY BUT IF YOU
WANT TO SEND I&apos;M SORRY MAKONE
MAYBE IF YOU WANT TO SEND THE
REST OF THE COMMENTS THAT YOU
WEREN&apos;T ABLE TO READ WE CAN
GIVE YOU THE EMAIL ADDRESS AND
THEN YOU CAN SEND A MAN SO THAT
WE CAN MAKE SURE THAT WE FULLY
HEAR WHAT YOU HAD TO SAY.
&gt;&gt; AND I WANT TO THANK THE
TENANTS FOR COMING IN AND
SPEAKING UP ABOUT THE HUMAN
SIDE OF DEVELOPMENT AND WHAT
THE IMPACTS OF OUR HOUSING
CRISIS HAS ON YOU.
AND I JUST APPRECIATE YOU
COMING SHARING THAT WITH US.
&gt;&gt; SO THANK YOU.
MY QUESTIONS I WANT TO START
WITH STAFF SO IF WE CAN GO BACK
TO THE CONVERSATION THAT
COMMISSIONER MILLS STARTED WITH
THE ZONING AND THE PD, I JUST
HAVE SOME CLARIFYING QUESTIONS
BECAUSE I THOUGHT I WAS OK AND
THEN OUR CONVERSATION GOT ME A
LITTLE OUT OF SORTS.
SO I JUST WANT TO CLEAR CLARIFY
A FEW THINGS.
SO I&apos;M IN THE SUPPLEMENTAL
REGULATIONS DOCUMENT FOR THE PD
AND CAN YOU START BY JUST
CLARIFYING THAT POINT D MEANS
THAT THIS IS GOING TO STAY WITH
THIS DEVELOPMENT REGARDLESS
OF IF THIS THING IS BUILT?
&gt;&gt; NO UNDER WHICH SECTION UNDER
SECTION THREE.
&gt;&gt; SO BECAUSE I&apos;M TRYING TO GET
TO WHAT THE BENEFITS ARE AND
ARE THESE THE BENEFITS THESE
FOUR ITEMS THAT ARE NOTED AND
WITH THESE DAY WITH THE
DEVELOPMENT THOSE ARE THE
FINDINGS REQUIRED BENEFIT
REQUIREMENTS ACHIEVE THE
BENEFITS ARE IN SECTION FOUR.
OK, SO ONLY THE ITEMS IN FOUR
ARE GOING TO STAY WITH THE
DEVELOPMENT.
CORRECT.
OK SO THEN CAN CAN EITHER YOU
MR. LEARNER OR MR. CHANG
CLARIFY?
&gt;&gt; I COULDN&apos;T FIND IN THE UDC
THE FLOOR AREA RATIO FOR OUR
FORESE IS THERE ONE CHRIS GO
AHEAD.
&gt;&gt; YEP THERE&apos;S NOT A FLOOR AREA
RATIO ALTHOUGH THERE&apos;S A
MINIMUM AREA PER DWELLING UNIT.
&gt;&gt; CORRECT.
SO WHAT WHAT WAS BEHIND THE
MAXIMUM OF TEN THOUSAND SQUARE
FEET HERE.
&gt;&gt; SO THE SO I GAVE A LITTLE
BIT OF FLEXIBILITY WHAT I WAS
DISCUSSING THIS WITH THE
PETITIONER I BELIEVE IT&apos;S A
NINE THOUSAND YEP.
SOME SQUARE FOOT BUILDING SO IF
THEY EVER DID SOME TYPE
OF ADDITIONS THEY WOULD NOT
HAVE TO COME IN AND DO SOME
TYPE OF YOU KNOW AN AMENDMENT
TO THE PUDI.
SO IT&apos;S NOT EXACTLY THAT BUT
IT&apos;S WORKING.
&gt;&gt; SO THIS IS FOR THE
PETITIONER TO BE ABLE TO DO IN
ADDITION WITHOUT HAVING TO COME
BACK AND MODIFY THE PUDI.
YES, I GAVE FLEXIBILITY ON THE
FLOOR AREA ON SETBACKS, ON THE
DRIVE WITH I MEAN NOT A LOT BUT
ENOUGH THAT IF YOU GO OUT THERE
AND IF IT&apos;S A THREE AND A HALF
FOOT SIDE SETBACK I GAVE THREE
FEET IN CASE YOU KNOW THERE&apos;S
THERE&apos;S ISSUES OUT THERE SO
YES, THERE&apos;S FLEXIBILITY BUILT
IN OK AND THEN IN THE UDC ARE
OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENT FOR OUR
FORCES.
&gt;&gt; WHAT I BELIEVE IT WAS WHAT
THIRTY FIVE PERCENT GIVE ME ONE
SECOND HERE AND WE ARE
ADJUSTING DOWN TO TWENTY THREE
HERE IT&apos;S IT&apos;S ACTUALLY FORTY
IT&apos;S FORTY PERCENT YES.
SO YES WITH A COVER OF THE
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE ON SITE THE
BUILDING AND THE CARPORT AND
THE DRIVE.
YES AND IN FACT I THINK IT&apos;S
YES THAT SOUNDS RIGHT.
TWENTY THREE PERCENT OK AND
THEN WITH THE THE SET BACK SO
AGAIN IF WE WERE USING OUR
FORCE SEE THE SET BACK IS
TWENTY FIVE FEET ON THE FRONT
AND SO PART OF THE BENEFIT HERE
IS WE&apos;RE GOING TO BRING THAT
FORWARD AND THEN WE JUST HAD A
CONVERSATION ABOUT MAKING A
MAXIMUM TO THIS SO THAT THAT
ACTIVATION IF THIS DEVELOPMENT
ISN&apos;T DONE STAYS WITH THE PD
AND THAT WE WON&apos;T GET ANYTHING
THAT SET BACK MORE THAN TWENTY
FIVE FEET WHICH WOULD ASSUME
THAT IT&apos;S STAYING WITHIN THE
EXISTING HOUR FORESEE THAT WE
CAN WE CAN ADD THAT OK AND SO
AND THEN COULD YOU JUST CLARIFY
THE DRIVEWAY WITH THE DRIVEWAY
WIDTH IS APPROXIMATELY TEN FEET
MULTIFAMILY REQUIRES I BELIEVE
BETWEEN 18 OR 24 BUT IF THIS
WERE A ONE WAY DRIVE YOU KNOW
TEN FEET WOULD BE SUFFICIENT
BUT IT&apos;S NOT A TWO WAY DRIVE.
&gt;&gt; SO IT IS THAT BECAUSE THE
FIRE EGRESS IS THAT TO ALLOW
THE FIRE TRUCKS IN LIKE WHY DO
WE HAVE THAT REQUIREMENT AND
OUR FOUR C DOES IT ASSUME THEY
GOT A LOT I GUESS IS WHAT I&apos;M
WHAT I&apos;M WONDERING ABOUT.
AND SO THAT&apos;S WHY YOU MADE THE
RECOMMENDATION TO MAKE IT LESS.
&gt;&gt; YES.
I MEAN THE PD DOES ALLOW FOR,
YOU KNOW, REDUCTIONS WHETHER IT
IS FOR SETBACKS, HEIGHT,
DRIVEWAY PARKING.
THE PD DOES ALLOW FOR THOSE
CHANGES.
&gt;&gt; OK, OK, SO THEN THE OTHER
QUESTIONS THAT I HAD CAME FROM
THE PETITIONER WHEN THE
PETITIONER NOTED THAT THEY
WOULD HAVE THAT HE WOULD HAVE
THE SAME VARIANCE OF A FOUR
HUNDRED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ON A
TWENTY ACRE LOT AND THEN I
HEARD THREE PREVAILING ISSUES.
ONE WAS THE CONFLICTING LAND
USE BUFFER WHICH I THINK YOU
ARE RESOLVING BECAUSE IT&apos;S
COMING UP AGAINST A PAVED
PARKING LOT AS OPPOSED TO A
RESIDENTIAL.
IS THAT CORRECT?
CORRECT.
AND THEN WE IT WAS THE SET BACK
ON THE NORTH OR THE FRONT
OF THE DEVELOPMENT WHICH WE
JUST TALKED ABOUT AND THEN THE
DRIVEWAY WITH ISSUE I THINK
COMMISSIONER MILLS TRIED TO ASK
A SIMILAR QUESTION IN THIS VEIN
AROUND WHAT THE VARIANCES
BETWEEN WOULD BE AND THAT GOT
INTO THE CONVERSATION AROUND
THE UNITS AND THE PARKING.
SO WE&apos;RE STILL BUILDING A SIX
UNIT SIX BEDROOM WITH ONE
PARKING SPACE TYPE
OF DEVELOPMENT EVEN THOUGH THAT
WOULDN&apos;T BE NECESSARY HERE AND
THAT&apos;S SORT OF THE PETITIONER&apos;S
PREFERENCE
.
ARE YOU ASKING ME?
WELL, NO.
YEAH, YEAH.
I MEAN ESSENTIALLY WHEN THIS
THIS PROJECT STARTED THEY WERE
REQUIRED TO HAVE THE MINIMUM
OF SIX PARKING SPACES.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
BUT THEN THAT WENT AWAY AND SO
ON.
AND SO AT THIS STAGE THIS IS
BECAUSE THE PETITIONERS DECIDED
TO BUILD THAT THIS WAY THAT IT
IS THIS WAY IT&apos;S NO LONGER
BECAUSE OF THE REQUIREMENT
OF THE PARKING I BELIEVE THAT&apos;S
CORRECT.
I MAY BE A QUESTION FOR HER,
MR. SELBY.
&gt;&gt; SURE.
BUT AND THEN YOU THEN YOU YOU
MENTIONED THE PART OF OUR
CODE THAT REQUIRES THAT
RESTRICTS MORE THAN SIX
UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS FROM
LIVING TOGETHER IN A UNIT AS A
AS A PART OF YOUR ANSWER TO
COMMISSIONER MILLS, DID YOU
WANT TO SAY MORE ABOUT THAT?
BECAUSE I&apos;VE I&apos;VE QUESTIONED
WHY THAT&apos;S IN THE CODE AND
WE&apos;VE HAD TWO CONVERSATIONS
ABOUT THAT.
THERE WAS A BUILDING
CODE REQUIREMENT OR SORT OF A
SAFETY ISSUE THAT WAS
UNDERLYING THAT AND THEN I WAS
CONCERNED ABOUT LIKE IS THIS A
LEGACY THING THAT WAS IN OUR
CODE BECAUSE WE WERE BEING A
DIFFERENT KIND OF COMMUNITY
WHEN THIS WAS DRAFTED AND WE
WANT IT TO RESTRICT UNRELATED
PEOPLE AND WHEN WE LOOK EVEN
FURTHER BACK WE CAN SEE THAT
THIS ACTUALLY HAS A LOT TO DO
WITH THE CONTROL OF THE
MOVEMENT OF HUMAN BODIES AROUND
IN OUR COMMUNITIES.
AND SO IS THERE ANY MORE ABOUT
THAT THAT YOU WANTED TO SHARE?
SURE.
WHICH I CAN MAYBE I&apos;LL TAKE A
STAB AT THAT.
&gt;&gt; SO IT IS A LEGACY CODE ?
IT IS IN THE PAST AND CURRENTLY
THE CITY HAS REGULATED THAT THE
SITE WHO CAN OCCUPY A HOUSEHOLD
SHOULD BE REGULATED.
&gt;&gt; IT DEFINES FAMILY AND THEN
IT PROVIDES AN ALTERNATIVE.
&gt;&gt; IF IT IS NOT A FAMILY IT CAN
BE UP TO A CERTAIN NUMBER
OF UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS AND
THE MAJORITY OF OUR DISTRICTS.
IT&apos;S FOR THEY ARE FOR DISTRICT
IT&apos;S SIX SO IT IS IT IS
DEFINITELY A LONG TIME
PROVISION.
I THINK IT&apos;S ALSO COME OUT
OF SOME COURT CASES
HISTORICALLY THAT CHALLENGED
THE CITY&apos;S DEFINITION OF FAMILY
AT ONE POINT IN TIME.
SO I THINK THERE&apos;S ALSO SOME
JUDICIAL BACKGROUND TO THAT
STANDARD AS WELL.
&gt;&gt; BUT NONE OF THAT WOULD BE AT
PLAY SINCE THIS IS A PEABODY
AND IT&apos;S A DIFFERENT ZONING.
&gt;&gt; NO, THE CITY COULD STIPULATE
SO THESE SUPPLEMENTAL
REGULATIONS DO DEFAULT TO THE R
FOR C TO DEFINE USES.
&gt;&gt; I THINK THAT OCCUPANCY WOULD
FALL INTO THAT CATEGORY.
BUT YES, THE PLANNING
COMMISSION AND THE CITY COUNCIL
COULD CHOOSE TO APPLY A
DIFFERENT STANDARD BUT IT
SHOULD BE CALLED OUT IF THAT&apos;S
A DESIRE.
OK.
OK, I THINK THOSE ARE THE
QUESTIONS THAT I WANT TO
CLARIFY.
THANK THANK YOU COMMISSIONER
WISCH.
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER SMALL COMMENT.
I&apos;M SORRY I JUST WANTED TO
CLARIFY ONE SMALL POINT.
I WANTED TO I WASN&apos;T BEING
QUITE SYSTEMATICALLY SYSTEMATIC
ENOUGH WITH MISS ELY WHO SPOKE
WE DID TALK ABOUT THE SOLID
WASTE TRUCKS.
YOU ASKED THE VERY, VERY GOOD
QUESTION WHETHER
THE PETITIONER
CAN DEVIATE FROM NET ZERO AND
THE THE ANSWER LET ME SEE IF I
GOT THIS RIGHT.
THE ANSWER IS THAT NET ZERO IS
NOT IN THE SUPPLEMENTAL
REGULATIONS WHICH CANNOT BE
DEVIATED FROM EITHER BY THIS
PETITIONER OR SHOULD THIS
PROJECT FAIL ANY FUTURE PERSON.
&gt;&gt; SO THE SUPPLEMENTAL
REGULATIONS ARE WHAT YOU LOOK
AT TO SEE WHAT IS HARD AND FAST
BUT IN AN EFFORT TO PRESERVE AS
MUCH OF THAT AS WE CAN WE HAVE
JUST AT THE TABLE TONIGHT ASKED
TO HAVE ADDED TO THE
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS A
PROHIBITION ON A GAS HOOKUP TO
THIS PROPERTY SO IT WILL BE
ELECTRIC AND WE HAVE ASKED TO
HAVE STAFF INCLUDE AN ENERGY
EFFICIENCY MEASURE WHICH WILL
REQUIRE THEM CHOOSING ONE AND
EXPLAINING TO CITY COUNCIL WHY
THAT WHY THEY CHOSE THE ONE
THAT THEY DID.
SO THAT&apos;S AN ENERGY EFFICIENCY
MEASURE.
IT&apos;S NOT GOING TO GUARANTEE US
THAT THIS BUILDING IS NOT ZERO,
NOT A GUARANTEE BUT IT WILL
ALLOW US TO MONITOR AND KNOW
WHAT THE BUILDING TURNED OUT TO
BE.
SO THERE IS AN EFFORT TO TO TO
RESPOND TO I THINK YOUR YOUR
VERY FAIR QUESTION DID I GET
ANYTHING OK, COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT, THANK YOU.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR
BRINGING THIS PROJECT TO US.
THANK YOU ALSO FOR YOUR
COMMENTS AND INSIGHTS ON HOW
CHALLENGING IT&apos;S BEEN TO SORT
OF NEGOTIATE WITH CITY STAFF.
I DON&apos;T THINK YOU&apos;RE ALONE IN
THIS COMMUNITY SO WE&apos;LL KEEP
FIGHTING.
I HAVE A FEW QUESTIONS.
WE GOT AN EMAIL FROM A MED
STUDENT WHO IS CONCERNED ABOUT
THE CONSTRUCTION NOISE.
SHE I THINK SHE SLEEPS DURING
THE DAY BUT I READ IN SOMETHING
YOU&apos;RE GOING TO BE PENALIZING
HER.
&gt;&gt; YOU&apos;RE BUILDING OFF SITE THE
FOUNDATION IS PENALIZED WILL BE
INSTALLED IN TWO DAYS.
THE ABOVE GRADE BUILDING IS
FIFTEEN MODULES.
IT WILL BE BUILT IN A FACTORY
IN BAY CITY AND SHIPPED HERE SO
THE BUILDING WILL BE DRIED IN
AND ABOUT TWO MAYBE THREE
WEEKS.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S AWESOME.
&gt;&gt; SO OBVIOUSLY DEFINITELY
DECREASES THAT THERE WILL BE A
LOT OF NOISE AND SORT OF KIND
OF STUFF WHEN WE&apos;RE DOING THE
UNDERGROUND WORK AND THE THE
EARTH WORK.
BUT AFTER THAT I THINK YOU KNOW
,OVERALL IT&apos;S PROBABLY LESS
THAN MOST.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S EXACTLY WHAT I WANTED
TO POINT THIS.
MEANWHILE, THERE ARE ALWAYS
THIS NOISE OF CONSTRUCTION.
THIS SHOULD BE A LOT LESS
NOISE.
&gt;&gt; CAN YOU I WAS REALLY
INTRIGUED BY WHEN YOU MENTIONED
THE PROGRAM TO TRAIN STUDENTS.
CAN YOU JUST TALK A LITTLE BIT
MORE ABOUT WHAT THAT MIGHT
ENTAIL?
&gt;&gt; YEAH, BUILDERS AND
REMODELERS ASSOCIATION
OF GREATER ANN ARBOR BREG IS
HAS A FOUNDATION THAT THEY&apos;VE
RUN FOR A LONG TIME SINCE THE
70S I THINK MAYBE EVEN EARLIER
.
BUT THEY HAVE ABOUT THIRTY HIGH
SCHOOL STUDENTS FROM ALL THE
AREA HIGH SCHOOLS AROUND HERE
AND EVERY YEAR THEY BUILD A
HOME AND IN YEARS PAST THEY
WOULD HAVE LOTS AND THEY WOULD
BUILD HOMES ON LOTS AND THEN
THEY WOULD SELL THE HOME AND
THAT&apos;S HOW THE FOUNDATION
CONTINUED AND IT&apos;S REALLY MEANT
TO GIVE STUDENTS WHO ARE MAYBE
NOT LOOKING TO GO TO COLLEGE OR
LOOKING FOR ALTERNATIVE CAREER
AS A WAY TO TO TO GIVE THEM
SOME SKILLS.
YOU KNOW, I I DID GO TO COLLEGE
AND HAD A LABORATORY CAREER
THAT I FLED AND I&apos;VE BEEN SO
HAPPY TO BE A BUILDER AND YOU
KNOW, I JUST SO I&apos;M A REAL
STRONG BELIEVER IN THE PROGRAM
.
THE COMPANY I FOUNDED AND USED
TO WORK AT MEADOWLARK HAS HIRED
MANY OF THOSE PEOPLE OVER THE
YEARS.
IT&apos;S A GREAT PROGRAM AND YOU
KNOW MY GOAL IS USUALLY THEY&apos;RE
KIND OF FOCUSED ON THE STUDS
AND THE NAILS AND KIND
OF BUILDING HOUSE AND YOU KNOW,
HAVING BEEN A FRAMER MYSELF,
IT&apos;S REALLY IT&apos;S A IT&apos;S A GREAT
THING AND ALL THAT.
BUT BECAUSE THIS IS A MODULAR
BUILDING, THEY&apos;RE GOING TO IT
WOULD BE MORE FOCUSING ON
HEATING AND COOLING AND
PLUMBING AND THE MANY ASPECTS
OF IT.
AND ALSO, YOU KNOW, THERE IS
CARPENTRY INVOLVED REALLY THE
IDEA WOULD BE TO DEVELOP A
CURRICULUM THAT GETS THEM READY
FOR THE NEXT PHASE THAT WE
REALLY DESPERATELY NEED AS
PEOPLE WHO UNDERSTAND
SUSTAINABILITY AND BUILDING.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S JUST IT&apos;S NOT THAT
COMMON.
YEAH, I KNOW THAT&apos;S NOT WRITTEN
INTO THE SUPPLEMENTAL
REGULATIONS BUT I SORT OF SEE
THAT AS A REALLY AMAZING
NONTRADITIONAL PUBLIC BENEFIT
TO THIS PROJECT IS REALLY
HELPING TRAIN YOUNGER AND IT&apos;S
NOT A DONE DEAL YET EITHER HAS
TO GO THROUGH THERE&apos;S MANY
MEMBERS OF THE FOUNDATION WILL
ALL GET VOTED ON AND THINGS
LIKE THAT.
BUT YOU KNOW, IT&apos;S SOMETHING I
WOULD I WOULD REALLY LOVE TO
I&apos;D REALLY LOVE TO YOU KNOW, TO
GET THE STUDENTS IN THERE AND
YOU KNOW, TRAIN THEM ABOUT HOW
TO DO THIS ON THE REAL WORLD.
&gt;&gt; GREAT.
I HOPE THAT WORKS OUT WELL.
MY LAST QUESTION GOING BACK TO
THE SIX BEDROOM UNITS WHICH I
WON&apos;T REHASH I HAVE OPINIONS
BUT I&apos;M JUST CURIOUS SAY IN TEN
YEARS THERE&apos;S REALLY NOT A
MARKET FOR SIX BEDROOM UNITS.
IS THERE FLEXIBILITY IN THE WAY
THAT THIS IS DESIGNED THAT YOU
KNOW, YOU COULD SORT OF I WOULD
BE ADDING MORE KITCHENS BUT YOU
KNOW, IS THERE A POTENTIAL WAY
TO TO REDESIGN IS THERE DESIGN
FLEXIBILITY TO CREATE MORE
UNITS OUT OF THAT OR DO YOU SEE
THAT THIS IS LIKE THIS IS IT
THIS SIX BEDROOMS FOR UNITS?
&gt;&gt; WELL, I WOULD SAY HAVE
EXHAUSTED AN AWFUL LOT
OF DESIGN POSSIBILITIES ALONG
THE WAY AND YES, THERE WOULD BE
A WAY THERE&apos;S TWO LIVING ROOMS
IN EACH EACH APARTMENT.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S RIGHT.
I&apos;M REMEMBERING THIS NOW FOUR
YEARS AGO THERE IS YOU KNOW,
THE COMMON SPACE AREAS ARE
MEANT TO BE YOU KNOW, AS
GENEROUS AS WE COULD MAKE THEM
ANYWAY BECAUSE I WANT PEOPLE TO
BE ABLE TO REALLY HANG OUT
THERE AND ENJOY IT.
BUT YOU KNOW, AS FAR AS
REMODELING I HAVE NEVER REALLY
EVEN THOUGHT ABOUT THAT.
I&apos;M JUST, YOU KNOW, FOCUSED.
I KNOW I AM.
&gt;&gt; BUT I&apos;M SURE WHERE THERE&apos;S A
WILL THERE&apos;S A WAY TO KITCHENS
PER ANNUM.
&gt;&gt; I REMEMBERING THAT RIGHT
THERE THERE&apos;S MULTIPLE KITCHENS
OR IS IT JUST MULTIPLE FOUR
KITCHENS THERE&apos;S FOUR UNITS AND
FOUR OK I DON&apos;T KNOW WHAT I&apos;M
THINKING OF THAT CHRISTMAS I
WAS THINKING THERE LIKE
MULTIPLE KITCHENS IN THE STATE
MAYBE THAT WAS ANOTHER PROJECT
WAS OK I GO THANKS FOR THE
THINGS I REALLY LOVE ABOUT
MODULAR CONSTRUCTION IS THAT
THERE&apos;S AIR GAPS BETWEEN WALL
AND BETWEEN THE FLOORS SO YOU
CAN HAVE KIND OF LIKE A HERD
OF ELEPHANTS AND UP ABOVE AND
YOU DON&apos;T HEAR MUCH BELOW AND
ANYTHING AND THEN EVEN IN
BETWEEN WALLS THERE&apos;S A GREAT
DEAL OF SOUND ATTENUATION WHICH
IF YOU&apos;VE BEEN A LANDLORD YOU
CAN YOU KNOW THAT&apos;S A BIG DEAL
OR LIVED IN AN APARTMENT
BUILDING SO THE WAY THAT IT&apos;S
DESIGNED IT&apos;S THE MODULAR THING
IS THE SIX UNIT THING.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
SO WOULD BE SORT OF HARD TO
YOU&apos;D HAVE TO ADD IN YOU KNOW
YOU COULD YOU COULD TOTALLY DO
IT.
IT&apos;S IT WOULD REQUIRE PROBABLY
A LITTLE MORE SURGERY THAN
NORMAL BUT ACTUALLY THERE ARE
SOME BENEFITS TO THAT
CONSTRUCTION METHOD THAT MIGHT
MAKE IT SOME PARTS OF IT EASIER
ANYWAY.
&gt;&gt; SO YEAH THANK YOU.
I&apos;VE BEEN DOING THAT FOR SIX
YEARS OR SO YOU KNOW I MEAN
THERE&apos;S THERE&apos;S IT&apos;S JUST IT&apos;S
KIND OF LIKE A NORMAL HOME.
&gt;&gt; THERE&apos;S SOME SMALL
DIFFERENCES AND YOU KNOW, I
HAVE ANY OTHER QUESTIONS OR
COMMENTS COMMISSIONERS&apos;
CONFESSIONALLY JUST WANTED TO
DO A RECAP ON WHERE WE&apos;RE AT.
&gt;&gt; I THINK JUST TO RECAP, I
THINK WE HAD ADDING A MAXIMUM
SET BACK TWENTY FIVE FEET TO
SECTION FOUR B WE TALKED
REGULATION BEING ADDED TO MAKE
SURE THAT THE BUILDING COULD BE
FULLY ELECTRIFIED WITH NO GAS
CONNECTIONS AND THEN I THINK
THAT THERE IS STILL DEBATE WITH
RESPECT TO SHOULD AN ENERGY
EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENT BE
CODIFIED IN THE PUDI AND WHAT
ARE THE MEASURABLE AND PUNITIVE
IMPACTS SURROUNDING SO SO IS
THAT WHERE WE ARE RIGHT NOW?
THERE&apos;S THOSE THREE MY
UNDERSTANDING WAS FOR NUMBER
THREE THAT WE WOULD DIRECT
STAFF TO ESTABLISH AN ENERGY
STANDARD TO BE ADDED BETWEEN
NOW AND WHEN THE PETITION GOES
TO CITY COUNCIL.
OK, GOT IT UNDERSTOOD FROM FROM
MY STANDPOINT I WOULD BE IN
SUPPORT OF ADDING THAT MAXIMUM
SEPAK AS WELL AS THE FULLY
ELECTRIC AND NO GAS AND I GUESS
I&apos;LL JUST PROVIDE JUST A LITTLE
BIT OF COMMENTARY I THINK FROM
WHERE I SAID THIS SEEMS LIKE A
GREAT PROJECT.
I KNOW THAT IT CAN BE DIFFICULT
TO SEE CHANGE AND I THINK THE
HISTORIC PRESERVATION OF A
NEIGHBORHOOD IS VERY IMPORTANT
SO THAT THE FOURTH WARDS I
THINK ENDORSEMENT IS GREAT THE
OLD FOURTH WARD NEIGHBORHOOD
AND THEN EVERYTHING THAT YOU&apos;VE
KIND OF GONE OVER CREATING
CONSISTENCY AND THE RHYTHM
OF THIS PARTICULAR BUILDING
FORM DOWN DIVISION AND
STRETCHING OUT OF LIKE
RESIDENTIAL ACTIVITY IS PRETTY
IMPORTANT.
&gt;&gt; SO EVEN EXTENT ON YOUR WATER
CONSUMPTION I THINK ALL IS VERY
HELPFUL DETAIL.
&gt;&gt; I DON&apos;T KNOW IF THAT SHOULD
BE MANDATED AND FRANKLY I JUST
WANT TO PUT LIKE THE ENTIRE
PUDI KIND OF LIKE NARRATIVE
THROUGH THE PERIOD BECAUSE IT&apos;S
PRETTY DETAILED.
&gt;&gt; I DO AGAIN ACKNOWLEDGE ALL
OF THE COMMENTS THAT WE&apos;VE
HEARD TONIGHT.
I HAVE TO SAY OVERALL KIND
OF BALANCING OF THE THINGS I
WOULD BE IN SUPPORT OF ADDING
MAXIMUM SET BACK TWENTY FIVE
FEET SECTION BE CREATING A
SECTION FOR THE FULLY ELECTRIC
AND NO GAS ON SITE AND I WOULD
SAY THAT I WOULD BE IN SUPPORT
OF THIS THANKS.
THANK YOU.
ANYONE ELSE, COMMISSIONER MILLS
UNLESS OR SOMEBODY ELSE THAT
GOES I THINK I&apos;D LIKE TO MAKE A
MOTION TO ADD THOSE FORMALLY
ADD THOSE THREE AMENDMENTS AS
COMMISSIONER LEE JUST
ARTICULATED.
MR. LEARNER, YOU HAVE SIMILARLY
ARTICULATED THEM SO THIS WOULD
BE PROPOSED MOTION TO MODIFY
THE SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS TO
ADD A MAXIMUM FRONT SET BACK
OF TWENTY FIVE FEET AND
MAINTAIN THE MINIMUM TEN FOOT
IT WOULD DIRECT STAFF TO
PRESENT A ENERGY EFFICIENCY
STANDARD FOR THE CONSTRUCTION
OF THE BUILDING FOR
CERTIFICATION AT THE TIME
OF COMPLETION TO BE INCLUDED AT
CITY COUNCIL CONSIDERATION
AND
IT WOULD PROHIBIT NATURAL GAS
CONNECTIONS TO THE THE
DEVELOPMENT.
&gt;&gt; SO ANYONE WHO WANTS TO
SECOND THAT MOTION COMMISSIONER
SECONDS THE MOTION DO WE DO A
ROLL CALL VOTE FIRST SEE IF
THERE&apos;S ANY DISCUSSION.
SORRY.
THANK YOU ALL DISCUSSION OF THE
MOTION.
I HAVE A QUESTION COMMISSIONER.
THIS WOULD BE FOR THE
PETITIONER THIS IS PURELY A
CURIOSITY FULLY ELECTRIC
BUILDING.
&gt;&gt; WHAT HAPPENS IF FOR HEATING
PURPOSES BECAUSE THIS WILL FEED
INTO THE NEXT DISCUSSION IF
ELECTRICITY GOES DOWN AND IT&apos;S
LIKE A FREEZING FREEZING NIGHT,
WHAT&apos;S WHAT LIKE WHAT WHAT
NEXT?
&gt;&gt; WELL, THE LAST PASSIVE HOUSE
WE BUILT AT MY OTHER COMPANY
BUILT I DON&apos;T KNOW IF YOU
REMEMBER WHEN ANN HILLS LOST
POWER FOR A WEEK A COUPLE
OF YEARS AGO THAT HOUSE NEVER
FELL BELOW SIXTY ONE DEGREES
AND THEIR ONLY COMPLAINT WAS
THEY SMELLED PRETTY FUNKY IN
THEIR THEY&apos;RE VERY, VERY TIGHT
AND WITHOUT SORT OF THE ENERGY
RECOVERY VENTILATOR SORRY
NEEDING TO VENTILATE THE
BUILDING IT WILL HOLD ITS HEAT
VERY, VERY WELL.
&gt;&gt; ALSO THERE&apos;S BATTERIES AND
SOLAR SO I DON&apos;T THINK I
PROBABLY WOULD HAVE ENOUGH
JUICE IN THE BATTERIES TO RUN A
GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM THAT I NEED
AND THE SIZE GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM
I NEED IN THERE.
BUT IT WOULD IT WOULD AT LEAST
THERE ARE SOME SOME HEATERS
SUPPLEMENTAL WALL FAN UNITS
THAT WOULD OPERATE.
THEY ONLY USE ABOUT ONE HUNDRED
AND FIFTY WATT AND SO THOSE
WOULD ABSOLUTELY WORK AND I
THINK HONESTLY ANY ONE OF THOSE
ONE ON EACH UNIT WOULD PROBABLY
BE ENOUGH TO HEAT THE UNIT.
SO I THINK YOU&apos;RE SAFER IN THAT
THAN YOU WOULD BE IN ALMOST ANY
OTHER TYPE OF BUILDING.
SURE, SURE.
APPRECIATE THE RESPONSE.
&gt;&gt; THANKS.
AND ANY OTHER DISCUSSION OF THE
MOTION?
OK, WE&apos;RE READY TO VOTE.
ALL RIGHT.
SO THIS ON THE MOTION TO MODIFY
THE SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS AS
DESCRIBED COMMISSIONER MILLS.
YES.
COMMISSIONER SAUVé.
COMMISSIONER ABRAMS.
YES.
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
COMMISSIONER.
YES.
YES, COMMISSIONER.
COMMISSIONER.
YES.
YES, COMMISSIONER.
COMMISSIONER CLARK.
YES.
COMMISSIONER WHITE.
&gt;&gt; YES.
ALL RIGHT.
THE OF THE REGULATIONS ARE
MODIFIED.
ANY MORE DISCUSSION?
ALL RIGHT.
I THINK WE&apos;RE READY TO VOTE.
SO THIS IS TO RECOMMEND
ALL RIGHT.
APPROVAL OF THE ZONING AND SITE
SO THIS IS TO RECOMMEND
PLAN AS AMENDED BY ACTION.
APPROVAL OF THE ZONING AND SITE
&gt;&gt; UH, COMMISSIONER MILLS?
PLAN AS AMENDED BY ACTION.
YES.
&gt;&gt; UH, COMMISSIONER MILLS?
COMMISSIONER SAUVé.
YES.
COMMISSIONER ABRAMS.
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
YES.
YES, COMMISSIONER ED..
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
YES, COMMISSIONER.
YES, COMMISSIONER ED..
YES.
YES, COMMISSIONER.
COMMISSIONER CLERK YES.
YES.
COMMISSIONER WHITE.
COMMISSIONER CLERK YES.
YES.
COMMISSIONER WHITE.
WASHING CARS
.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;LL NEED ONE MINUTE TO
BRING COMMISSIONER RANDALL
BACK.
YES, PLEASE.
OK, WE ARE NOW MOVING ON TO
ITEM EIGHT D TWENTY TWO ONE
EIGHT SEVEN THREE AMENDMENTS TO
CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED
DEVELOPMENT CODE C SECTIONS
FIVE POINT ONE SIX POINT SIX
POINT ZERO ACCESSORY USES AND
STRUCTURES PERSONAL SCALE SOLAR
ENERGY SYSTEM TO REMOVE
RESTRICTIONS FOR INSTALLATION
OF SOLAR ENERGY INSTALLATION
AND SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY
ZONING DISTRICTS AND TO ADD A
NEW ENERGY SECTION TO ARTICLE
FOR DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS THAT
WOULD PROHIBIT NATURAL GAS
CONNECTIONS IN ALL NEW
CONSTRUCTION AND SUBSTANTIAL
FULLY RENOVATED OR EXPANDED
BUILDINGS.
STAFF RECOMMENDATION IS
POSTPONEMENT UM EXCUSE ME.
&gt;&gt; SO AS PRESENTED THESE ARE
TWO PROPOSED AMENDMENTS THE
BASIS FOR THE RECOMMENDATION
FOR A POSTPONEMENT IS THAT
WHILE ONE VERSION OF THIS WAS
PRESENTED PREVIOUSLY TO THE
ORDINANCE REVISIONS COMMITTEE
IN THE IN THE PRESENT IN THE
FORMAT THAT THESE WERE
PRESENTED IN YOUR PACKET THEY
WERE JUST PUBLISHED LAST WEEK
AND I THINK THEY&apos;RE PRETTY BIG
CHANGES.
SO MY RECOMMENDATION IS
POSTPONEMENT TO AT LEAST
DECEMBER 6TH TO PROVIDE SOME
MORE TIME FOR STAKEHOLDERS AND
THOSE INTERESTED TO REVIEW AND
FORMULATE ANY COMMENTS THEY
MIGHT HAVE AS IDENTIFIED IN THE
BACKGROUND MEMO WE ARE CURRENT
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOCUSES
INCLUDES TWO RECOMMENDATIONS
THAT ARE APPLICABLE I BELIEVE
TO BOTH THE PROPOSED ORDINANCE
AMENDMENTS.
ONE IS TO IMPROVE THE ACCESS
AND INCREASE THE USE
OF RENEWABLE ENERGY BY ALL
MEMBERS OF OUR COMMUNITY AND TO
REDUCE ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND
ELIMINATE NET GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS AND REDUCE THE
EXISTING BUILDINGS AND NEW
BUILDINGS.
ENERGY USE CARBON IMPACT AND
CONSTRUCTION WASTE WHILE
RESPECTING COMMUNITY CONTEXT.
THESE ARE RECOMMENDATIONS THAT
ARE IN OUR 2030 SUSTAINABILITY
FRAMEWORK WHICH IS PART OF OUR
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ON TOP
OF THAT AS AS THE PREVIOUS
AGENDA ITEM WAS NOTED, THERE&apos;S
BEEN A LOT OF CONVERSATION AT
THIS TABLE ABOUT THE CITY&apos;S
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS AND THAT
GOAL IDENTIFIED IN OUR
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AS I&apos;VE
SHARED BEFORE, I I HEAR A LOT
OF DESIRE ON BEHALF OF THE
PLANNING COMMISSION THAT&apos;S NOT
UNIQUE TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION.
THERE ARE OTHER ADVISORY
COMMISSIONS IN THE CITY AS WELL
THAT ARE REALLY INTERESTED IN
THE CITY ENACTING REGULATIONS
THAT HELP DRIVE POSITIVE
MOMENTUM TOWARDS REACHING
CLIMATE CARBON NEUTRALITY GOALS
AS THE CITY IS HAS HAS
IDENTIFIED AND I WOULD FURTHER
OBSERVE AT TIMES THAT MY
IMPRESSION IS THAT AS A
COMMISSION YOU ARE FRUSTRATED
THAT YOU AT TIMES ARE FELT THAT
YOU ARE HAVING TO APPROVE
PROJECTS THAT ARE NOT FULLY
ELECTRIFIED AND DON&apos;T NECESSARY
TO ADVANCE THESE GOALS TO THE
GREATEST EXTENT OR TO AS MUCH
OF AN EXTENT AS DEVELOPMENT
CUT.
&gt;&gt; SO TO THAT END THERE ARE TWO
ORDINANCES HERE PROPOSED ONE
WOULD BE AN ENTIRELY NEW
SECTION OF THE UDC CALLED
ENERGY.
&gt;&gt; IT WOULD BE A NEW FIVE FIVE
POINT TWENTY SEVEN.
AND AS AS A REMINDER THE UDC IS
BROKEN DOWN INTO A COUPLE
OF CATEGORIES.
IT IS AN OVERVIEW OF OUR ZONING
DISTRICTS.
WHAT USES YOU CAN DO IN THOSE
ZONING DISTRICTS AND THEN THE
NEXT SECTION IS HOW YOU MUST
DEVELOP PROPERTY.
&gt;&gt; SO THIS WOULD FALL INTO THAT
CATEGORY AND IT WOULD SET A
STANDARD THAT ESSENTIALLY FOR
ALL NEW CONSTRUCTION,
SUBSTANTIAL RENOVATIONS AND
SIZABLE ADDITIONS IT WOULD
PROHIBIT FUTURE CONNECTION TO
NATURAL GAS UTILITIES FOR THOSE
PROPERTIES THE NATURAL GAS
CONNECTION COULDN&apos;T BE
MAINTAINED UNLESS FOR SOME
REASON IT WAS MANDATED BY A
BUILDING OR FIRE PROTECTION
CODE .
MY UNDERSTANDING IS THERE MIGHT
BE SOME CIRCUMSTANCES WHERE TO
MEET CERTAIN FIRE
CODE PROTECTIONS THAT THE
TECHNOLOGY JUST MAY NOT BE IN
EXISTENCE RIGHT NOW TO ACTUALLY
MEET AND I&apos;M NOT GOING TO GO
ANY FURTHER BUT IT THE CARVE
OUT IS WHEN ONE OF THOSE BASIC
CODE PUBLIC SAFETY REQUIRE
MENTS NECESSITATES A NATURAL
GAS CONNECTION.
THIS WOULD NOT SUPERSEDE THAT
WHEN OPTIONS ARE AVAILABLE TO
PROVIDE THOSE SAME SERVICES
WITH FULL ELECTRICAL ELECTRIC
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT WOULD BE
REQUIRED THE SECOND ORDNANCE IS
A BIT OF RIVA&apos;S OF THE PERSONAL
SCALE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM.
SO TWENTY TWENTY TWO THOUSAND
SEVEN EIGHT I&apos;M ESTIMATING WE
CREATED SOLAR PERSONAL SCALE
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS IN OUR UDC
AND WE WENT THROUGH AN EXERCISE
AT THAT TIME AND WE ENDED UP
ADOPTING WE ENDED UP DEFINING
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS AND WE
ACTUALLY ENDED UP REGULATING
THEM TO A HIGHER DEGREE THAN WE
DO SOME OTHER ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES IN THE CITY TO THE
AFOREMENTIONED COMPREHENSIVE
PLANNING GOAL TO PROVIDE AS
MUCH ACCESS AND OPPORTUNITY FOR
RENEWABLE ENERGY IN THE CITY AS
POSSIBLE.
I PRESENTED I&apos;M PRESENTING SOME
LANGUAGE THAT WOULD REVISIT
THAT AND SEEK I THINK TO BE
CLEAR I THINK THESE WOULD BE
PRETTY MODEST REALIZATIONS BUT
THE PROPOSED CHANGES WOULD
ACTUALLY PROVIDE MORE
FLEXIBILITY FOR GROUND MOUNTED
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS THAN OTHER
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN THE
CITY.
&gt;&gt; SPECIFICALLY THEY WOULD
ALLOW THE INSTALLATION
OF GROUND MOUNTED SOLAR AND
FRONT YARDS INCLUDING FRONT SET
BACKS.
IT WOULD STILL REQUIRE A
MINIMUM SET OF TEN FEET FOR
THOSE.
&gt;&gt; SO IT&apos;S STILL NOT ABSOLUTE.
IT WOULD PROVIDE SOME MORE
FLEXIBILITY FOR THE PLACEMENT
OF THAT AND
WOULD ALSO REMOVE
THE APPLICATION THAT APPLIES
BROADLY CURRENTLY TO BOTH
GROUND MOUNTED SOLAR AND OTHER
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS THAT THEY
CAN&apos;T COVER .
MORE THAN THIRTY FIVE PERCENT
OF THE REQUIRED REAR YARD
SETBACK IN BOTH CASES THIS
PROPOSED LANGUAGE WOULD PROVIDE
MORE FLEXIBILITY FOR THESE AS
ACCESSORY USES THAN THAN
MATCHING OR BEING MORE
RESTRICTIVE THAN OTHER
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE REGULATIONS
IN THE CITY.
SOME OF SOME OF THE RESEARCH
SORT OF JUMPING BACK A LITTLE
BIT TO ELECTRIFICATION I THINK
MOSTLY IS ANOTHER REASON FOR
THE RECOMMENDATION FOR THE
POSTPONEMENT AT THE ORDINANCE
REVISIONS COMMITTEE.
SOME OF THE RESEARCH THAT WAS
REQUESTED I STILL HAVE NOT
COMPLETED YET BUT SOME OF THEM
WE HAVE STARTED WORKING ON
GENERALLY ONE QUESTION WAS CAN
OUR GRID HANDLE IT?
AND RIGHT NOW OUR BEST ANSWER
TO THAT IS YES, THE GRID CAN
HANDLE IT IS MAKING SIGNIFICANT
INVESTMENTS AND ITS ELECTRIC
GRID HERE IN THE CITY.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME THERE ARE
CHALLENGES TO PROVIDE ELECTRIC
SERVICE TO PROJECTS WITH OR
WITHOUT NATURAL GAS
CONNECTIONS.
&gt;&gt; SO THAT&apos;S NOT TO SAY THAT
THERE WON&apos;T BE COSTS ASSOCIATED
WITH IT SOMETIMES
ELECTRIFICATION WE CAN COULD
RESULT IN A HIGHER COST THAN A
COMPARATIVE COST IF FOR EXAMPLE
,THAT ELECTRIC POWER HAS TO
COME FURTHER FROM A MORE
COMPLEX CIRCUIT.
BUT GENERALLY OUR UNDERSTANDING
IS THAT THE CAPACITY DOES EXIST
IN THE CITY TO ACCOMMODATE THIS
THE ANOTHER PIECE OF THAT
RESEARCH IS IS ELECTRIFICATION
AS A GOAL OF THE CITY BECAUSE
AS THAT GRID BECOMES MORE
RENEWABLY SOURCE THAT BECOMES A
MORE RENEWABLE SOURCE OF ENERGY
RIGHT NOW ELECTRIFICATION
DOESN&apos;T NECESSARILY HIT THAT TO
THE DEGREES THAT WE ALL ASPIRE
TO.
SO I&apos;M TRYING TO GET SOME MORE
RESEARCH ABOUT TRYING THE
EVALUATION AND MEASUREMENT
OF HOW THAT LOOKS TODAY.
&gt;&gt; NOT UNLIKE EVERY PARKING
SPACES THOUGH I STILL THINK
IT&apos;S A WORTHWHILE CONSIDERATION
FOR FUTURE PROOFING DEVELOPMENT
EVEN IN THE CONTEXT OF THAT
DECISION OR THE THE FACTS
OF THAT.
&gt;&gt; THE OTHER PIECE OF RESEARCH
IS SOME EXAMPLES FROM OTHER
COMMUNITIES THAT REQUIRE
ELECTRIFICATION.
THERE AREN&apos;T IN MANY THERE
AREN&apos;T ANY IN MICHIGAN THAT I&apos;M
AWARE OF .
HOWEVER, THERE ARE SOME AND
SOME OTHER COMMUNITIES ACROSS
THE COUNTRY.
SO I&apos;M GOING TO BRING SOME
OF THE EXAMPLES OF THOSE.
BUT I ALSO WILL BE PACKAGING
THOSE IN A WAY THAT
APPROPRIATELY RECOGNIZES THAT
WE HAVE TO MAKE LAND USE
REGULATORY DECISIONS ON
DIFFERENT LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
THAN OTHER STATES AND THERE IS
ANOTHER QUESTION ABOUT I THINK
I&apos;M GOING TO BE LOOKING
SPECIFICALLY IN SOME OF THOSE
ORDINANCES WHICH I HAVE NOT
COMPLETED THIS RESEARCH YET AS
TO SPECIFIC USES THAT OTHER
ORDINANCES MIGHT SPECIFICALLY
EXEMPT OR PROVIDE MORE
FLEXIBILITY BECAUSE THEY ARE
MORE CHALLENGING TO MEET THAN
THE ELECTRIFICATION
REQUIREMENT.
I DON&apos;T HAVE THOSE ANSWERS YET.
GENERALLY I WOULD MY SUMMARY
OF THE DISCUSSION OF THE
ORDINANCE REVISIONS COMMITTEE
WAS RELATIVE TO ELECTRIFICATION
THAT THAT THIS IS A BIG
QUESTION WORTHY OF DISCUSSION
BY THE FULL PLANNING COMMISSION
AT THE NRC.
I DON&apos;T THINK THERE IS A
UNIFIED DECISION OR OPINION
THIS HAS IF IF THE CITY WERE TO
ENACT THIS IT REALLY DOES SET
THE CITY APART AND DEVELOPMENT
REQUIREMENTS IN THE CONTEXT
OF OUR REGION.
DOES THAT MAKE DOES IT MAKE ALL
THINGS CONSIDERED DEVELOPMENT
MORE APT TO BE LOCATED IN THE
CITY LESS APT?
WHAT IMPLICATIONS DOES THAT
HAVE IF WE ARE SETTING A HIGHER
STANDARD THAT IS PERCEIVED IN
SOME WAY TO BE MORE CHALLENGING
OR MORE EXPENSIVE OR UNCERTAIN
EVENTS SURROUNDING COMMUNITIES
?
&gt;&gt; AT THE SAME TIME WE HAVE
CLEARLY ARTICULATED THOSE GOALS
AS IT RELATES TO SOLAR ENERGY.
I THINK THAT THERE WAS A LOT
OF CONVERSATION ABOUT I THINK
THERE WAS MORE COMFORT IN
PROPOSING AMENDMENTS THAT JUST
APPLY THE SAME ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE STANDARDS THAT APPLY
TO ALL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
I FEEL LIKE I AM PRESENTING
SOMETHING THAT&apos;S SLIGHTLY MORE
AGGRESSIVE THAN THAT TO THE
FULL COMMISSION.
I WANT TO NAME THAT AT THAT
CONVERSATION I THINK THERE WAS
MORE COMFORTABLE COMFORT JUST
MAKING IT A LEVEL PLAYING FIELD
.
THE PROPOSED CHANGES HERE GOES
A STEP FURTHER AND ACTUALLY
MAKES THEM THE REGULATIONS LESS
RESTRICTIVE FOR THOSE USES THAN
OTHER ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
&gt;&gt; SO SO SOME MORE RESEARCH TO
DO SOME PROPOSED LANGUAGE
THAT&apos;S CLEARLY ARTICULATED THE
LAST THE LAST PIECE THAT I JUST
WANT TO MAKE SURE IT IS
ADDRESSING THE BACKGROUND.
MEMMO, ENERGY EFFICIENCY IS NOT
INCLUDED IN THIS BOTH IN THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ENERGY
EFFICIENCY IS IDENTIFIED IN
YOUR WORK PROGRAM.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY IS IDENTIFIED
FOR SIMILAR REASONS.
I THINK AT I THINK THE SOURCE
OF UTILITY IS AN APPROPRIATE
FIRST STEP FOR A LAND USE
REGULATORY AUTHORITY WHEN WE
GET INTO BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY I THINK
THAT THEY ARE MORE APT TO BE
REGULATED BY THE BUILDING
CODE AS OPPOSED TO LOCAL ZONING
ORDINANCES.
&gt;&gt; BUT THERE MIGHT BE
OPPORTUNITIES IN THE FUTURE
STILL TO LOOK AT INCENTIVE
INCENTIVISATION.
BUT THIS IS VERY MUCH AN
INTENTIONAL BREAKING APART
OF THOSE DECISIONS TO US
BECAUSE I THINK THERE&apos;S
PROBABLY PLENTY TO UNPACK WITH
BOTH ASPECTS OF THAT.
SO HAPPY TO ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS EITHER FROM THE
COMMISSION AS WE DISCUSS.
GREAT.
THANK YOU SO LET&apos;S MOVE ON TO
THE PUBLIC HEARING FOR THIS AND
THEN WE&apos;LL MOVE INTO DISCUSSION
.
IT&apos;S AN OPPORTUNITY FOR PERSONS
TO SPEAK UP TO THREE MINUTES
ABOUT THESE CHANGES TO THE
AUDIENCES FOR FIRST CALL ON
INDIVIDUALS TO ADDRESS THE
COMMISSION, THEN REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK DURING
THE PUBLIC HEARING PLEASE PRESS
STAR NINE IF LISTENING BY PHONE
OR USE TO RAISE YOUR HAND
FEATURE OF YOU INSTEAD
OF WEBLINK FOR PHONE ACCESS
CALL 877 EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE
TO FOUR SEVEN AND INTERMEETING
ID NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX
THREE FOUR ONE TWO TWO SIX.
CITY STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS
TO RAISE YOUR HAND USING THE
LAST THREE DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE
NUMBER OR BY NAME AVAILABLE
THROUGH ACCESSING THROUGH THE
WEB LINK YOU&apos;LL HEAR AN
AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT THE HOST
IS ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK WHEN
SPEAKING PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET
AREA AND MUTE ANY TELEVISION
BACKGROUND SOUND SO THAT WE MAY
HEAR YOU CLEARLY FOR EITHER
METHOD OF PARTICIPATION.
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANYONE IN THE ROOM
THAT WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK ABOUT
THIS PETITION
?
GOOD.
&gt;&gt; GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS RANDALL WHITTAKER.
I&apos;M THE BUSINESS MANAGER FOR A
LOCAL 190 PLUMBERS PIPEFITTERS
CARE GAS DISTRIBUTION WORKERS
AND HVAC SERVICE TECHNICIANS
HERE IN ANN ARBOR.
&gt;&gt; I WANT TO SPEAK ABOUT THIS
BILL SPECIFICALLY.
I KIND OF STAND ON BOTH SIDES
OF THIS BUT I SPEAK AGAINST
THIS ORDINANCE MAINLY BECAUSE
IT&apos;S REALLY TOO BIG OF A JUMP
TOO FAST AND I&apos;M CERTAINLY NOT
SPEAKING AGAINST SUSTAINABILITY
AND GOING GREEN BUT THE VERY
FIRST SENTENCE OF FIVE POINT TO
SEVEN POINT TWO AND LIKABILITY
WHICH SAYS ALL BUILDINGS
CONSTRUCTED AFTER JANUARY FIRST
TWO THOUSAND AND TWENTY THREE
NO GAS CONNECTIONS.
THAT&apos;S A GREAT IDEA AND I&apos;M
FULLY FOR IT.
MY MEMBERS WORK HERE IN ANN
ARBOR WITH IN ANN ARBOR AND
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN WE DO
GEOTHERMAL NATURAL GAS
CONNECTIONS OF COURSE PLUMBING
AND PIPE FITTING.
BUT I EMPLOY I EMPLOY ALL
OF YOU TO JUST THINK ABOUT FOR
A SECOND IF YOU REALLY WANT TO
THINK ABOUT WHAT THIS MIGHT DO
AS WRITTEN AND I STRESS AS
WRITTEN, GO AHEAD AND SHUT THE
NATURAL GAS LINE OFF TO ANN
ARBOR RIGHT NOW AND YOU WILL
FIND OUT WHAT THAT MEANS IS
WHAT IS THIS ORDINANCES AS
WRITTEN?
WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO THE CITY?
YOU CAN&apos;T JUST FLIP A SWITCH
THAT FAST.
CERTAINLY WORK TOWARDS IT.
MY MEMBERS MYSELF AS AN
ORGANIZATION WE&apos;RE ON BOARD
WITH IT TOWARDS ZERO EMISSIONS.
BUT IF YOU&apos;RE GOING TO FLIP A
SWITCH LIKE THIS, IT&apos;S GOING TO
HAVE NEGATIVE CONSEQUENCES.
IT&apos;S ALREADY BEEN BROUGHT UP
THE INFRASTRUCTURE, THE
CAPACITY MAYBE THERE SOMEBODY
MAY BE TELLING YOU IT&apos;S THERE.
MAYBE THAT&apos;S TRUE BUT YOU DON&apos;T
KNOW FOR SURE YET.
AND I CAN TELL YOU FROM MY
POINT OF VIEW WHAT I SEE AROUND
MICHIGAN AND WHAT I&apos;VE BEEN
INVOLVED WITH THAT
INFRASTRUCTURE IN WASHTENAW
COUNTY AND ESPECIALLY ANN ARBOR
ISN&apos;T THERE YET.
OF COURSE WE CAN WORK TOWARDS
IT.
ALL OF YOU CAN WORK TOWARDS IT.
BUT AGAIN, THIS ORDINANCE AS
WRITTEN YOU KNOW I&apos;M ASKING YOU
ALL TO AT THE VERY MINIMUM
POSTPONE IT, DO SOME MORE
RESEARCH AND ESPECIALLY JUST
KNOW THAT THAT INFRASTRUCTURE
ISN&apos;T READY FOR SUCH A BIG JUMP
SO FAST.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; IS THERE ANYBODY ELSE IN THE
ROOM THAT WOULD LIKE TO ADDRESS
THE PLANNING COMMISSION ON THIS
ISSUE
?
WE TARGET RANDALL KENT GARBER
AGAIN.
YOU KNEW I WAS GOING TO HAVE TO
TALK ON THIS ONE.
YEAH, NO ONE&apos;S TALKING ABOUT
FRACKING THE GAS WHICH TO ANN
ARBOR NOTHING IS GOING TO
SUDDENLY CHANGE ON JANUARY 1ST.
TWENTY TWENTY THREE
OR WHATEVER
DATE THIS TAKES EFFECT GAS
STOVE UNFORTUNATELY TO THE VAST
MAJORITY OF BUILDINGS IN THIS
IN THE CITY WHICH CONTRIBUTE
THE BIGGEST SINGLE PERCENTAGE
OF GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS FOR
THE CITY MUCH MORE THAN EVEN
TRANSPORTATION I&apos;M GOING TO
NAME SOME PROJECTS, ALL
ELECTRIC PROJECTS THAT YOU&apos;VE
APPROVED IN THE LAST TWO AND A
HALF YEARS OF HOLLIGAN
MERIDIANI COUNTY PARK TWENTY
ONE ELEVEN PACKARD LOCKWOOD
SENIOR LIVING UNIVERSITY IN
RESIDENTIAL EIGHTEEN FIFTEEN
NORTH THESE SHOW PROOF
OF PRINCIPLE IS THIS IS
POSSIBLE AND RENTALS
INSTITUTIONAL BUILDINGS AND
SINGLE FAMILY HOMES THE
CAPACITY I BELIEVE PROBABLY IS
NOT THERE IF SUDDENLY EVERY
DEVELOPER WANTED TO JUMP IN AT
ONCE AND AND DO ALL THEIR
PROJECTS SIMULTANEOUSLY BUT
IT&apos;S A GRADUAL PROCESS.
PROJECTS COME TO YOU
SPORADICALLY AND IF THERE ARE
CAPACITY PROBLEMS I WOULD HOPE
THAT THEY COULD BE ADDRESSED IN
TANDEM.
THERE STILL MAY BE AN UPFRONT
COST DIFFERENCE GOING ALL
ELECTRIC VERSUS GAS BUT IT&apos;S
VERY SMALL IN RELATION.
THE OVERALL PROJECT COST HEAT
PUMPS ARE MUCH MORE EFFICIENT
IN GAS PRICES IN TERMS OF BTUS
PRODUCED PER UNIT ENERGY AND
THE HIGHER PRICE OF ELECTRICITY
VERSUS GAS HAS NOW ALMOST
DISAPPEARED FOR UTILITY COSTS
SHOULD BE AT ROUGH PARITY.
IN FACT IN MY DISCUSSION IN OUR
DISCUSSION WITH THE ROBERTSON
BROTHERS STAFF IT NEVER CAME
UP.
THERE WERE OTHER ISSUES SUPPLY
CHAIN ISSUES DTT IN INSURGENTS
WHEN IT COMES TO HOOKING UP
ELECTRIC BUT NOT UTILITY CALLS
AT THE CURRENT NATURAL GAS
PRICES FROM A CLIMATE
STANDPOINT IT&apos;S INSANE TO KEEP
PUTTING GAS IN NEW
CONSTRUCTION.
WE&apos;RE LOCKING IN GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS FOR THE NEXT HALF
CENTURY OR MORE OR WE&apos;RE GOING
TO HAVE TO RETROFIT HUGE COST
IT I CAN&apos;T TELL YOU HOW
STRONGLY I FEEL THAT THIS IS.
IT MAKES NO SENSE NOW THERE ARE
NO TECHNICAL OBSTACLES TO GOING
ALL ELECTRIC.
YEAH, THERE&apos;S DTT WITH DELAYS
THAT THE ROBERTSON BROTHERS
TEAM HAS EXPERIENCED AT OTHER
LOCATIONS.
I OUT.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
WOULD ANYBODY ELSE LIKE TO
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
?
&gt;&gt; HI I&apos;M RON MUTYA WITH
MORNINGSIDE GROUP AND MY
PURPOSE HERE IS NOT TO COMMENT
ON THE THE MERITS OF THE
ORDINANCE FOR ELECTRIFICATION
BUT TO SPEAK TO THE THE
LANGUAGE OF THE ORDINANCE.
SO AS DRAFTED I&apos;M HOLDING THE
THE ORDINANCE IT&apos;S IT&apos;S FAIRLY
BROAD AND I IMAGINE THAT&apos;S
BECAUSE IT&apos;S JUST THE STARTING
POINT OF DISCUSSIONS BUT IT
DOES SAY THAT THE APPLICABILITY
IS ALL BUILDINGS CONSTRUCTED
AFTER JANUARY ONE OF TWENTY
THREE.
SO I GUESS MY AS YOU REFINE
THIS ORDINANCE IF IT&apos;S IF IT&apos;S
PROCEEDS TO ACTUALLY BECOME
ENACTED I I BELIEVE THAT IT
WOULD BE REASONABLY NECESSARY
TO EXCLUDE SITE PLAN APPROVED
PROJECTS THAT HAVE BUILDINGS
THAT HAVE NOT YET BEEN
CONSTRUCTED AS OF THE DATE
OF THE ORDINANCE ENACTMENT.
WERE THAT TO HAPPEN AND THEN
SPECIFICALLY JUST IN THE CASE
OF OUR OWN PROJECTS OF ELEVEN
FORTY BROADWAY JUST A JUST TO
GIVE AN EXAMPLE SO THAT&apos;S A
THREE PHASE PROJECT APPROVED IN
TWENTY SEVENTEEN ALL OF THE
SITE IMPROVEMENTS INCLUDING THE
UNDERGROUND UTILITIES,
EASEMENTS, EVERYTHING THAT WAS
NECESSARY WERE CONSTRUCTED
DURING THE PROJECT&apos;S FIRST
PHASE.
AND FOR ANYONE WHO&apos;S NOT
FAMILIAR WITH THE PROJECT&apos;S
CURRENT STATUS, THE FIRST PHASE
WAS JUST COMPLETE.
THE SECOND PHASE IS WELL UNDER
CONSTRUCTION.
IT&apos;S ABOUT HALF BUILT AND THE
THIRD PHASE OF THE PROJECT HAS
YET TO BE DETERMINED
COMMENCEMENT DATE.
SO IT&apos;S ENTIRELY POSSIBLE IF
NOT LIKELY THAT IT WOULD START
CONSTRUCTION AFTER THAT THIS
ORDINANCE WOULD BE ENACTED.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
ANYBODY ELSE PRESENT THAT WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK ON THIS ISSUE
?
&gt;&gt; ANYBODY WAITING VIRTUALLY
FOR US?
NO HANDS RAISED MONEY.
OK, ALL RIGHTY.
I WILL READ THE MOTION WHICH IS
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION
FIVE POINT ONE SIX POINT SIX
OF CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE FIFTY
FIVE UNIFIED TWELVE IN CODE OF
TITLE FIVE OF CODE OF THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR.
A PERSONAL SCALE SOLAR ENERGY
SYSTEMS AND AND ORDINANCE TO
ADD SECTIONS FIVE POINT TO
SEVEN THROUGH FIVE POINT TWO
NINE TO CHAPTER 55 UNIFIED
DEVELOPMENT CODE OF TITLE FIVE
OF CODE THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
ELECTROPAC MOVED BY
COMMISSIONER WEISS SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER DISH.
&gt;&gt; WE ARE IN DISCUSSION MR.
SAUVé, I WANT TO START BY JUST
OFFERING A COUPLE MORE KIND
OF INFORMATION POINTS MAYBE TO
THE COMMISSION SO THE BUREAU
OF CONSTRUCTION AT THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN JUST HIRED A NEW
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND HIS ROLE
IS OVERSEEING THE ADOPTION
OF THE CONSTRUCTION CODES AT
THE STATE LEVEL.
SO AS IT&apos;S KIND OF REFERENCED
WITHIN THIS, MICHIGAN ADOPTS
ALL OF OUR CODES AT THE STATE
LEVEL SO ANN ARBOR DOESN&apos;T
ADOPT A BUILDING CODE .
THE STATE OF MICHIGAN DOES.
AND SO WITH THAT ONLY JUST THIS
PAST FALL MICHIGAN ADOPTED THE
TWENTY EIGHTEEN PLUMBING CODE .
IT&apos;S CURRENTLY IN THE WORKS
OF THE TWENTY TWENTY ONE
MICHIGAN ENERGY CODE .
&gt;&gt; IT WAS PREVIOUSLY IN THE
WORKS OF ADOPTING THE TWENTY
EIGHTEEN MICHIGAN BUILDING
CODE BUT WITH THE TRANSITION
OF LEADERSHIP THEY SAID WE
SHOULD MATCH THE MICHIGAN
ENERGY CODE IN THE MICHIGAN
BUILDING CODE AND THEY&apos;RE
WORKING NOW TOWARDS A
TRAJECTORY OF ADOPTING THE
MICHIGAN TWENTY TWENTY ONE
BUILDING CODE NEXT YEAR TO
MATCH THEY&apos;RE LOOKING OF MOVING
THIS PRETTY AGGRESSIVELY SINCE
MUCH OF THE CONVERSATION HAS
ALREADY BEEN HAPPENING TO BE
ADOPTED BY OCTOBER OF NEXT
YEAR.
&gt;&gt; SO JUST TO KIND OF GIVE A
LINE ABOUT THE ENERGY
CODE OUTSIDE OF THIS ORDINANCE
AND THE BUILDING CODE THAT
MEETS SOME OF THESE STANDARDS,
I WOULD SAY ONE OF THE BIGGEST
THINGS MAYBE NOT IN TERMS
OF THE SUSTAINABILITY FACTOR
BUT WITHIN THE TWENTY TWENTY
ONE BUILDING CODE IS ALSO THE
INCLUSION OF A NEW CONSTRUCTION
TYPOLOGY WHICH IS LIKE THE
FIRST IN A HUNDRED YEARS
MACHINE BUILDING CODE WHICH IS
MASS TIMBER.
SO THERE&apos;S KIND OF OTHER
ELEMENTS THAT GO ALONG WITH IT.
BUT THE ENERGY CODE OF COURSE
IS CONTINUOUSLY ELEVATED.
SO I JUST WANT TO KIND OF OFFER
THAT UP AS LIKE ADDITIONAL
CONTEXT TO THE TYPES OF CODES
THAT WE&apos;RE WORKING WITH OUTSIDE
OF THIS ORDINANCE AT LEAST FROM
MY COMMENT INDUSTRY EXPERIENCE.
&gt;&gt; AND SO I&apos;LL OFFER UP KIND
OF A COUPLE OF THINGS TO BOTH
OF THESE ORDINANCES.
I UNFORTUNATELY WAS NOT
ATTENDED TO OR MEETING BUT I
DID SHARE SOME OF OUR
APPLICATION PROCESS FOR PROJECT
CURRENTLY UNDERWAY ABOUT PRE
SUBMITTAL WITH DTT AND THE
PROCESS THAT TAKES PLACE.
SO WE&apos;VE BEEN IN CONVERSATION
WITH DC FOR THREE MONTHS NOW
AND I&apos;VE ONLY JUST NOW
ESTABLISHED THAT WE NEED TO
BORROW POWER FROM A NEIGHBORING
CIRCUIT NOT THE CURRENT SUPPLY
CIRCUIT FROM A DIFFERENT
SUBSTATION.
WHAT THAT MEANS IS THAT THAT
SUBSTATION HAS NOW DEDICATED TO
A NEW NEIGHBORHOOD AND REDUCES
THE POWER AVAILABLE TO THE
NEIGHBORHOOD BASED ON THE
SUBSTATION DISTRIBUTION.
&gt;&gt; SO AT SOME POINT DEVELOPER
UNITS ARE GOING TO START
CONTINUING TO BORROW POWER AND
RESHIFT IN CIRCUIT THE
SUBSTATIONS AND WE WILL NEED TO
UPGRADE THE SUBSTATIONS NOT
JUST THE CIRCUITS USE TIMELINE
IS FROM ENGINEERING DEVELOPMENT
WITH THE PLAN FOR FULLY
ELECTRIC BUILDING AND GETTING
THE ACTUAL WORK ORDER SERVICES
STARTED SIX MONTHS TO A YEAR TO
DO THAT WORK AND A QUARTER OF A
MILLION DOLLARS JUST ABOVE A
CIRCUIT.
JUST GIVE US FOR INFORMATIONAL
CONTEXT.
WE&apos;RE HAPPY TO DO IT.
BUT I THINK WHAT I SAY IN TERMS
THIS ORDINANCE IS THAT I&apos;M
ACTUALLY REALLY EXCITED THAT
IT&apos;S HERE BECAUSE IT GIVES A
VERY TRANSPARENT PROCESS TO
WHAT WE&apos;RE LOOKING FOR INSTEAD
OF THE UNCERTAINTY OF THE
DELIBERATIONS AT THIS TABLE AND
THE CONCERN OF PROJECTS AND SO
WELL THERE WILL BE, YOU KNOW,
FRICTION AND A LEARNING CURVE
AT LEAST IT WILL BE A CLEAR
PATH FOR ELECTRIFICATION
INSTEAD OF CONCERNS ABOUT
GETTING SUPPORTING BOATS FOR
PROJECTS WITH A PREFERENCE FOR
ELECTRIFICATION.
SO I SUPPORT THIS.
I DO AGREE THAT THE DATE IS
VERY SOON AND THAT&apos;S GIVEN THE
TIMELINE, YOU KNOW, THAT WE&apos;VE
EXPERIENCED WITH PROJECTS THAT
IT TAKES SIX MONTHS TO A YEAR
AND THAT&apos;S WHEN YOU STARTED THE
PROJECT WITH PLANS FOR FULL
ELECTRIFICATION.
IF THERE ARE PROJECTS CURRENTLY
IN DESIGN SIMILAR TO THE
PREVIOUS PROJECT THAT WE SAW
THE SAME REASON PARKINGTON SIX
UNITS IS PROBABLY IT WAS
DESIGNED THAT WAY WHEN WE HAD
PARKING ORDINANCES AND IN THE
LAST THREE MONTHS THERE WASN&apos;T
ROOM TO REDESIGN THAT IN THE
BUDGET OF PREDEVELOPMENT.
THE SAME LOOKS FORWARD HERE
THAT I&apos;D REALLY KIND OF LOOK
FORWARD TO MAYBE A DATE CERTAIN
SIX TO NINE MONTHS
DOWN THE
ROAD FROM ADOPTION RATHER THAN
A STATE THAT WE&apos;RE NEARING AS
WE CONTINUE THESE CONVERSATIONS
TOWARDS POSTPONEMENT.
THOSE ARE KIND OF MY GENERAL
KIND OF CONDITIONS AT THIS
CONVERSATION AT THE TABLE
TONIGHT AND I POSTPONEMENT AND
THEN ON THE SOLAR YES.
AND I WOULD SAY KIND OF TWO TO
TWO FACTORS IN TERMS OF MY
READING OF THIS IS SIMILAR TO
APD, THE PUBLIC BENEFIT FOR
SOLAR AND GIVING MORE
FLEXIBILITY ARE MATCHED INSTEAD
OF MEETING THE SAME ACCESSORY
AND SET BACK THAT THIS IS A
BENEFIT AND DESERVES THE
ADDITIONAL FLEXIBILITY.
AND I SEE THIS AS A GREAT
OPPORTUNITY ESPECIALLY ON
QUARTER LOTS WITH A DOUBLE
FRONT YARD TO REALLY UTILIZE IT
WHERE THERE&apos;S SOME DIFFICULTY
FOR NEIGHBORS TO HAVE LARGE
SITES THAT JUST DON&apos;T HAVE A
LOT OF THINGS TO USE ON THOSE
SITES.
SO I SEE A LOT OF BENEFIT AS
IT&apos;S DRAFTED.
I UNDERSTAND THAT THAT THAT
KIND OF PUBLIC BENEFIT
FLEXIBILITY IS SOMETHING THAT
DESERVES DISCUSSION.
SO I LIKE I APPRECIATE SOME
OF THE RESEARCH THAT&apos;S GOING TO
KIND OF COME FORWARD BUT THAT&apos;S
JUST THAT&apos;S MY INDUSTRY
EXPERIENCE I WANT TO OFFER UP
AND JUST REALLY APPRECIATE THIS
COMING FORWARD.
&gt;&gt; GREAT.
THANK YOU FOR THAT.
THAT&apos;S HELPFUL.
I HAVE JUST A QUESTION FOR YOU
WHILE YOU&apos;RE WELL YOU&apos;RE GOING
WITH THIS IN TERMS OF THE KIND
OF NEWER BUILDING CODES THAT
ARE COMING ON AND THIS IS SORT
OF IN BETWEEN THE TWO OF YOU.
HOW HOW DO THESE THINGS HOW DO
THEY INTERFACE?
I&apos;M JUST CURIOUS HOW HOW OUR
LOCAL CODE INTERFACES WITH THE
MICHIGAN BUILDING CODE .
I KNOW IT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT&apos;S
KIND OF CONTINUALLY BEING
ADOPTED AND WE ALWAYS SEEM TO
BE SEVERAL YEARS BEHIND IT.
I&apos;M JUST CURIOUS HOW HOW CAN WE
PULL THIS OFF BECAUSE WE&apos;VE
ALWAYS HEARD THAT WHEN WE GET
INTO THESE SORTS OF ISSUES THAT
IT&apos;S NOT REALLY PART OF OUR
JURISDICTION.
SO I&apos;D HAVE TO UNDERSTAND HOW
YOU ALL ARE THREADING THE
NEEDLE AND HOW YOU&apos;RE MAKING
THAT ALL WORK.
&gt;&gt; SO GENERALLY THE STATE
ADOPTS BUILDING CODES AND THEY
APPLY ACROSS THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN LAND USE OR ZONING
IS ADOPTED LOCALLY SO ZONING IS
MORE OF A LABORATORY, IF YOU
WILL, FOR A LOCAL COMMUNITY TO
PRIORITIZE THE THINGS THAT&apos;S
IMPORTANT TO IT.
I WANT TO BE CLEAR THERE ARE
QUESTIONS ABOUT WHETHER OR NOT
UTILITY CONNECTIONS EXTENDING
TO A PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT FALLS
WITHIN THAT CATEGORY.
I PUT SOME OF THE BASIS IN THAT
MEMO WHY I THINK IT DOES I WILL
NOT BE THE ONLY ARBITER OF THAT
DECISION HOWEVER.
&gt;&gt; SO AS THOSE BUILDING CODES
ARE ADOPTED, THE
INTERRELATIONSHIP FOR THEM AS
THEY ARE ADOPTED AT THE STATE
THEY&apos;RE GOING TO BE IMPLEMENTED
HERE I DON&apos;T KNOW IN THOSE
PROPOSED CHANGES IF THEY
REPLICATE THIS KIND
OF REQUIREMENT I DON&apos;T KNOW IF
THEY KNOW THOSE ANSWERS YET.
BUT THE THE SHORT ANSWER IS THE
STATE MAKES THAT DECISION FOR
US.
WE MAKE OUR OWN DECISION AS IT
RELATES TO THE UDC AS
ARTICULATED AND AGAIN JUST TO
REEMPHASIZE LAND USE LAW
PROVIDES SOME SPECIFIC PURPOSE
STATEMENTS AS TO MAKING LAND
USE PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION
TO PROTECT NATURAL RESOURCES,
PRESERVE PUBLIC HEALTH AND
MANAGE OUR INFRASTRUCTURE.
DIFFERENT STATE LEGISLATION
SAYS THIS IS THE PLACE THE
BUILDING CODES THAT ARE ADOPTED
AT THE STATE LEVEL THAT
DETERMINES HOW ENERGY EFFICIENT
BUILDINGS WILL BE AND THAT&apos;S
SPECIFICALLY WHY IT&apos;S NOT TO
SAY THAT THERE ARE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR INCENTIVIZING
LOW STANDARDS BUT I DON&apos;T THINK
THAT THERE ARE THE SAME
OPPORTUNITIES TO MANDATE THOSE
STANDARDS IN THE ZONING
CODE AND I DON&apos;T KNOW IF
COMMISSIONER SO THEY WOULD ADD
ANYTHING TO THAT.
&gt;&gt; I THINK THE ONLY OTHER THING
I WOULD ADD YEAH.
LIKE THEY GET ADOPT THE GENERAL
LIKE THE BUILDING CODE IS THE
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE AND
THEN EACH STATE MAY MAKE
AMENDMENTS TO THAT.
SO MICHIGAN SPECIFICALLY AND I
THINK THIS COMES TO WHAT WE&apos;RE
TALKING ABOUT HERE THE FIRE
CODE AND THINGS IS MICHIGAN
ACTUALLY HAS THE LOWEST HEIGHT
FOR HIGH RISES AND ONCE YOU HIT
A HIGH RISE STANDARD IN
ARCHITECTURE, THE THE RESERVE
ENERGY THAT YOU NEED TO POWER
FOR PRESSURIZING YOUR EMERGENCY
EGRESS, YOUR EMERGENCY LIGHTING
AND ALARMS AND THINGS LIKE THAT
NEEDS TO BE SUPPLIED RIGHT.
AND SO AT A CERTAIN SKILL
BUILDING BATTERY PACKS ARE NOT
GOING TO SUPPLY ALL OF THE
EMERGENCY NEEDS AND SO THAT&apos;S
LIKE A GAS HOOKUP OR YOU HAVE
FUEL STORAGE ON SITE WITH A
GENERATOR.
SO THAT&apos;S KIND OF ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT DEPENDING ON THE
DISCUSSIONS IN THE NEXT YEAR
WITH ADOPTION DETERMINING SOME
VARIANCES FROM THE THE
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING
CODE TURNING INTO THE MICHIGAN
BUILDING CODE AND THE SAME WITH
THE ENERGY CODE THEY ALL COME
FROM A SIMILAR PLATFORM AND
THEN THE STATE ADJUSTED DOWN
THE OTHER THING AS ENERGY
CODE MECHANICAL CODE ELECTRICAL
CODE MOVED FORWARD IS THAT
BUILDINGS TAKE MORE ENERGY.
WELL, WE HAVE MORE ENERGY
EFFICIENT UNITS AND THINGS LIKE
THAT.
&gt;&gt; THE AMOUNT OF AIR
RECIRCULATED FOR HEALTHY SPACES
ACTUALLY DEMANDS KIND OF MORE
ENERGY ON THE SYSTEMS VERSUS
OUR OUR OLDER SYSTEMS THAT
DIDN&apos;T HAVE TO ACTUALLY TURN
OVER AIR AT THE SAME VOLUME
THAT IT DOES NOW.
SO IT&apos;S A TRADEOFF THAT MANY
PROJECTS ARE REQUIRING
UPGRADING THEIR SERVICE TO MEET
THE CURRENT MECHANICAL AND
ENERGY CODE BECAUSE THERE&apos;S
JUST MORE REQUIREMENTS TO IT AS
WELL.
SO WHILE WE&apos;RE ACTUALLY SAVING
ENERGY WITH A CERTAIN SYSTEMS,
THERE&apos;S JUST MORE REQUIREMENT
TO MEET THE HIGHER QUALITY
OF BUILDING STANDARDS.
GREAT.
THANK YOU.
OTHER DISCUSSION, COMMISSIONER
OR ELSE I HAVE A LONG LIST
BECAUSE I DO AND IT&apos;S NOT I&apos;VE
TRIED TO ORGANIZE BUT IT&apos;S
PROBABLY NOT GOING TO BE ALL
ORGANIZED SO I&apos;M GOING TO START
WITH SOLAR BECAUSE I THINK
THAT&apos;S EASIER IN TERMS OF THE
DATES WE KEEP IT THE SOLAR
ORDINANCES LEFT OUR PLATE IN
TWENTY SEVENTEEN AND IT WAS
TWENTY EIGHTEEN AND I GOT TO
TELL YOU I LOVE THAT CITY
COUNCIL DECIDED NOT TO TAKE OUR
RECOMMENDATIONS ACTUALLY AND I
IN MY DAY JOB REMIND PEOPLE A
LOT ABOUT HOW IT IS NOT
CONSISTENT AND SO I AM STRONGLY
IN FAVOR OF MOVING TO A
SITUATION WHERE WE ARE NOT
LIMITING SOLAR MAKING IT ANY
MORE RESTRICTIVE AND I I, I
THINK THE QUARTERBACK SITUATION
IS A PERFECT EXAMPLE OF WHERE
MAKING IT EVEN YOU KNOW, A AND
THE OTHER SUGGESTION EVEN MORE
PERMISSIVE TO ALLOW FOR SOLAR
LOTS MORE FLEXIBILITY I THINK
IS MUCH MORE CONSISTENT WITH
SOME OF OUR OTHER STATED GOALS
.
SO I&apos;M SUPPORTIVE OF THE
CHANGES IN THE SOLAR ORDINANCE
AND I DON&apos;T PERSONALLY KNOW
THAT WE NEED ANY ADDITIONAL
RESEARCH ON THAT.
&gt;&gt; LIKE FROM MY PERSPECTIVE I
THINK THEY&apos;RE GOOD TO GO AS
SOON AS WE WANT THEM TO BE AND
THEN I WILL STOP THROWING THE
CITY UNDER THE BUS BUT UNTIL
THEN I WILL CONTINUE TO SAY
THIS IS HYPOCRISY BECAUSE IT IS
HYPOCRISY.
&gt;&gt; SORRY IN TERMS OF THE IN
TERMS OF THE ELECTRIFYING
HAITIAN ORDINANCE, I&apos;VE GOT
JUST A BUNCH OF KIND OF RANDOM
THINGS.
I THINK THIS IDEA OF THE
LANGUAGE THINKING THROUGH WHAT
WE DO ABOUT THE PROJECTS THAT
WE HAVE ALREADY APPROVED IT IS
A LEGIT ONE ESPECIALLY IN PHASE
TWO PROJECTS.
&gt;&gt; I THINK THAT&apos;S REALLY WISE
AND SO I APPRECIATE THAT BEING
BROUGHT TO OUR ATTENTION.
&gt;&gt; THE NEXT ONE IS COMMISSIONER
LEE&apos;S COMMENT ON THE PREVIOUS
ONE.
SO THIS IS SOMETHING THAT&apos;S
USED A LOT AND MAYBE EVERY
HOUSE I&apos;VE LIVED IN IS IS WEIRD
BUT THE CIRCULATION FAN DOESN&apos;T
WORK EVEN ON A GAS FURNACE WHEN
THE POWER&apos;S OUT TOO.
SO IT&apos;S ACTUALLY NO DIFFERENT.
IT&apos;S JUST FIREPLACES LIKE
THAT&apos;S THE ELECTRIC HEAT OR
ELECTRIC HEAT IS NO LESS
RELIABLE IN IN A IN A POWER
OUTAGE SITUATION THAN GAS HEAT
BECAUSE IT&apos;S FORESTIER.
AND SO UNLESS AGAIN UNLESS
YOU&apos;VE GOT SOME KIND OF BACKUP
GENERATION WHICH IN WHICH CASE
YEAH.
THERE&apos;S THE BACKUP GENERATION
AND OK YEAH YEAH I MEAN THERE&apos;S
ALSO LIKE WELL OUR CLIMATE IS
SUCH THAT WE&apos;RE OUR NATURAL GAS
SYSTEM IS PREPARED FOR COLD BUT
NOT OTHER PLACE IN TERMS OF THE
RESEARCH LEONARD THAT I THINK
YOU TALKED ABOUT WITH REGARDS
TO LIKE THE EMISSIONS
COMPARISONS, I I DON&apos;T KNOW
THAT THAT&apos;S I DON&apos;T KNOW THAT I
WOULD PUT TOO MUCH EFFORT IN
THAT IN PART.
I MEAN IT DIDN&apos;T GO FAR ENOUGH
BUT JUST CAME OUT WITH THIS
INTEGRATED RESOURCE PLAN WHICH
DOES MOVE UP THE RETIREMENT
DATE OF THE COAL OF PARTS THE
COAL FLEET AND SO IT IS GETTING
CLEANER AND IT WILL CONTINUE TO
GET CLEANER.
AND SO AGAIN WE KNOW THAT THIS
IS THE DIRECTION THAT THE GRID
IS HEADING AND THAT YES, RIGHT
NOW IT MAY BE IT MAY INCREASE
IN EMISSIONS TEMPORARILY BUT
THEN WE ARE NOT LOCKING
OURSELVES INTO ADDITIONAL
INFRASTRUCTURE AND THE
ADDITIONAL MATERIALS AND THAT
ARE NEEDED FOR ADDING IN
ANOTHER KIND OF ANOTHER SYSTEM
.
SO LIKE THE IDEA THAT WE&apos;RE
JUST NOT ADDING IN WE&apos;RE NOT
EXTEND THAT GAS INFRASTRUCTURE
TO THAT PLACE AND HAVING IT&apos;S
NOT QUITE THE SAME AS STRANDED
ASSET BUT WE TALK ABOUT SOME
KIND OF COAL PLANT RETIREMENTS
BUT IT&apos;S THE SAME IDEA LIKE
YOU&apos;RE ADDING A NEW
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT IS GOING TO
BE OBSOLETE PRETTY SOON.
SO I DON&apos;T KNOW THAT I WOULD DO
THAT THAT RESEARCH THE RESEARCH
THAT I THINK WOULD BE REALLY
USEFUL THAT WE&apos;VE HEARD ABOUT
RECENTLY IS WHETHER THERE ARE
HARD TO ELECTRIFY SYSTEMS.
SO THIS IDEA OF KIND OF BACKUP
FOR WHEN YOU&apos;VE GOT A HIGH YOU
KNOW, WHEN YOU HAVE AN ELEVATOR
OR WHATEVER OTHER KIND
OF SYSTEMS LIKE THAT I THINK
SEEMS LIKE A REASONABLE
EXCEPTION.
WE HEARD THE OTHER DAY
SOMETHING ABOUT COMMERCIAL
KITCHENS AND AIR CIRCULATION OR
MAKE UP AIR FOR THAT.
I&apos;M CURIOUS ABOUT THAT.
I WOULD LIKE TO HEAR MORE THIS
BEFORE WHEN THE THE SITE ON THE
SOUTH SIDE OF TOWN KIND OF LAB
SPACE LIKE I THINK THINKING
THROUGH THAT&apos;S WHERE I WOULD
PUT ANY RESEARCH TIME IN TERMS
OF WHETHER THERE ARE THINGS
LIKE THAT THAT REALLY ARE JUST
HARD TO ELECTRIFY BUT OTHERWISE
I&apos;M EXCITED TO HAVE US MOVE
FORWARD ON THIS.
I DON&apos;T LIKE IT&apos;S NOT THE BEST
OF MY KNOWLEDGE.
IT&apos;S IT&apos;S GOOD THAT THE THAT
THE ENERGY CODE IS MOVING
TOWARDS EFFICIENCY.
I MEAN I&apos;VE BEEN INVOLVED IN A
LOT OF THE DISCUSSIONS KIND
OF AROUND THIS TOO.
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF MONEY COMING
FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FOR
THE STATES TO BOTH IMPLEMENT
THE EXISTING ENERGY CODE THAT
THEY HAVE HAVE BETTER
ENFORCEMENT ON IT AND TO MOVE
TO MORE INNOVATIVE ENERGY
CODE SO I THINK THAT THAT&apos;S
REALLY GREAT.
IT&apos;S NOT GOING AS FAR AS YOU
KNOW, ALL ELECTRIC THOUGH.
YEAH.
AND SO I THINK THAT THAT THE
TWO PRONGED APPROACH IS REALLY
WISE.
SO I&apos;M I&apos;M EXCITED TO SEE THIS
TO SEE KIND OF THIS COME
FORWARD AND HOPE THAT WE MOVE
FORWARD ON SOLAR SOON AND HAPPY
TO GET MORE RESEARCH ON
ELECTRIFICATION
COMMISSIONER, I
WOULD LIKE TO ADD ONE MORE
TOPIC AND I DIDN&apos;T THINK THAT
WAS SUCH A LONG LIST BUT I&apos;D
LIKE TO ADD ONE MORE TOPIC AND
THIS ISN&apos;T SO MUCH FOR RESEARCH
BUT MORE FOR CONSIDERATION.
AND I THINK THE I&apos;M SORRY THAT
I&apos;M NOT REMEMBERING NAMES OTHER
THAN THE ONES I ALREADY KNOW
BUT I&apos;D LIKE TO THANK A
REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE
PLUMBERS UNION FOR COMING AND I
THINK THAT I WOULD LIKE US
SOMEWHERE IN OUR DELIBERATIONS
TO CONSIDER THE ISSUE OF A JUST
TRANSITION.
I THINK THAT SOME OF THE
ANXIETY ABOUT THIS IS TOO BIG
OF A JUMP TOO FAST CONCERNS
WILL BE WILL BE NOT COMPLETELY
CHANGING OUR JOB MARKET BUT
WE&apos;RE GOING TO BE ACCELERATING
A TRANSITION OUT OF ONE SET
OF JOBS TO ANOTHER SET OF JOBS.
AND I KNOW THAT I KNOW THAT
WHEN PEOPLE IF I WERE TO
ELECTRIFY MY EXISTING HOUSE
WHICH HAS GAS, I WOULD BE
HIRING SOMEONE FROM THE FROM A
UNION TO COME AND CHANGE ON MY
ELECTRIC BOARDS BECAUSE I&apos;M
SURE THEY CAN&apos;T DO I&apos;M SURE MY
MY HOUSE IS NOT EQUIPPED FOR ME
TO ELECTRIFY.
&gt;&gt; AND SO THERE ARE SOME THINGS
THAT THAT THE TRANSITION WE&apos;RE
ENVISIONING HERE THERE ARE SOME
LOSSES THAT WILL BE OFFSET BY
GAINS IN OTHER WAYS.
BUT I THINK THAT&apos;S SOMETHING
THAT WE NEED TO TALK ABOUT
BECAUSE ONE OF THE FEATURES
OF OUR SUSTAINABILITY PLAN IS
EQUITY.
AND I THINK WHAT WE&apos;VE HEARD IS
A QUESTION FROM THE EQUITY SIDE
AND I PERSONALLY WOULD BE
DISTRESSED IF UNIONIZED JOBS
THAT ARE CURRENTLY WORKED BY
UNION LABORERS WERE GOT
SWITCHED OVER TO JOBS THAT
AREN&apos;T UNIONIZED YET.
AND I&apos;M VERY GLAD TO HEAR THAT
YOU DO GEOTHERMAL BECAUSE THAT
MEANS THERE IS UNIONIZATION IN
THE INDUSTRY.
BUT I DON&apos;T CARE FOR GROCERY
STORES FOR EXAMPLE, WHERE THEIR
WORKFORCE IS NOT UNIONIZED
UNLESS THEY&apos;RE CO-OP BECAUSE
THAT&apos;S A DIFFERENT THING.
BUT I DON&apos;T CARE FOR LARGE
GROCERY CHAINS THAT ARE
UNIONIZED BECAUSE THAT&apos;S A
REALLY STRONG UNION AND WE
SHOULD BE SHOPPING THERE UNLESS
WE&apos;RE GOING TO THE FARMER&apos;S
MARKET WHICH IS A DIFFERENT
MATTER.
AND SO THIS IS AN ISSUE THAT WE
NEED TO THINK ABOUT IS HOW DOES
THIS AFFECT OUR COMMITMENTS TO
NOT JUST SUSTAINABLE ENERGY BUT
SUSTAINABLE LIVELIHOODS SO WE
LIKE TO PUT THAT UP FOR
DISCUSSION AND I APPRECIATE
COMMISSIONER SAUVé RAISING THE
CONCERNS ABOUT THE PACE WITH
WHICH DTI WILL PARTICIPATE AND
WHAT WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT AND
THE PACE THAT WE SAY WE WANT
PROJECTS TO BE DONE BY AND I
BELIEVE COMMISSIONER MILLS
ALREADY CONCEDED THE POINT THAT
WE DO NEED TO THINK ABOUT
PROJECTS THAT WE HAVE ALREADY
APPROVED AND CITE PLANNED AND
THAT HAVE DONE CREATED PARTS
OF THEIR INFRASTRUCTURE.
BUT EVEN JUST SITE PLANTS THAT
WE&apos;VE APPROVED BECAUSE THAT IN
ITSELF, YOU KNOW, TO REDO AN
ENTIRE SITE PLAN TO CREATE AN
ENTIRE NEW I GUESS THESE WOULD
BE THE GUTS OF THE BUILDING
LARGELY I THINK OR WELL
WHATEVER IT&apos;S IT WOULD COST A
LOT OF MONEY AND TIME AND SO WE
NEED TO THINK ABOUT THAT
BECAUSE WE DON&apos;T WANT WHAT WE
KNOW.
YEAH, NEVER MIND.
I&apos;M NOT GOING TO SPIN ANY
SCENARIOS THAT WOULD BE SILLY
BUT THESE ARE THINGS THAT WE
NEED TO THINK ABOUT.
THERE IS ANOTHER ISSUE THAT WE
NEED TO THINK ABOUT WHICH IS WE
WOULDN&apos;T BE REDUCING ANYBODY&apos;S
CARBON FOOTPRINT IF OUR MORE
STRICT REGULATIONS PUSHED MORE
DEVELOPMENT TO THE PERIPHERY
AND CAUSED MORE PEOPLE TO DRIVE
IN.
HOWEVER, IF THE WHOLE STATE
CHANGES AND UPDATES ITS
BUILDING CODE WE WILL NOT HAVE
TO WORRY ABOUT.
SO I HOPE THAT THE PACE OF THAT
CHANGE IS SPEEDY FOR OUR SAKE
AND IT&apos;S NOT SOMETHING I JUST
THAT&apos;S JUST SOMETHING WE NEED
TO TALK ABOUT.
IT&apos;S NOT A REASON NOT TO DO IT.
PEOPLE MAY STILL PROBABLY WANT
TO DEVELOP IN ANN ARBOR
REGARDLESS BUT IT&apos;S SOMETHING
WE NEED TO THINK ABOUT AND
DELIBERATE CAREFULLY.
THAT&apos;S A COMMISSIONER.
&gt;&gt; I JUST WANTED TO SAY HOW
DELIGHTED I AM TO SEE THIS AND
HOW EXCITED I AM FOR US TO HAVE
THIS CONVERSATION AND TO
POTENTIALLY ENACT THIS CHANGE
TO OUR UDC.
SINCE JOINING THIS TABLE IN
AUGUST OF TWENTY TWENTY ONE I
HAVE BEEN QUITE SURPRISED WITH
WHAT I HAVE DESCRIBED AS THE
MISMATCH BETWEEN OUR
SUSTAINABILITY OBJECTIVES AND
WHAT WE DO AT THE TABLE AND I
HAVE SENT PLENTY OF EMAILS
TRYING TO RECONCILE THOSE
DISCREPANCIES AND HAVE BEEN
EDUCATED ABOUT HOW THE THE
CODES IN MICHIGAN WORK AND HOW
LOCAL RULE AFFECTS WHAT WE CAN
DO.
AND I&apos;M JUST EXCITED THAT WE&apos;RE
ACTUALLY ABLE TO DO SOMETHING
IN OUR UDC THAT SORT OF MATCHES
OUR SUSTAINABILITY VISION AND I
LOOK FORWARD TO OUR FUTURE
CONVERSATION AND
AND THAT OTHER
COMMISSIONERS HAVE ALREADY
ARTICULATED AROUND THE FIRST
QUESTION I WAS GOING TO ASK IS
WHAT DOES THIS DO FOR SITES
THAT WE&apos;VE ALREADY DEVELOPED?
SO IF WE ENACT THIS AS WRITTEN
,DOES THE VILLAGE HAVE TO DO
ALL ELECTRIC?
SO THAT WOULD BE MY QUESTION
FOR THAT.
AND THEN WHAT KIND NOTICE DO
THEY GET SINCE THEY HAVEN&apos;T
STARTED THAT DEVELOPMENT?
BUT I THINK THOSE THINGS WILL
BE RESOLVED WHEN WE COME BACK
TO OUR CONVERSATION IN THE
FUTURE.
BUT I&apos;M EXCITED TO SEE THIS.
I&apos;M DELIGHTED THAT WE&apos;RE WE&apos;RE
TALKING ABOUT THIS AND ON THE
SOLAR PIECE I YOU KNOW, I
APPRECIATE COMMISSIONER ILSE&apos;S
COMMENTS AND CHEER YOU ON AND
I&apos;M HOPING WE CAN MAKE THAT
MORE ACCESSIBLE TO MORE PEOPLE
AS QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE.
ANYBODY ELSE, COMMISSIONER,
THANK YOU.
WE&apos;VE OFTEN TALKED ABOUT
TENSION AT THIS TABLE BETWEEN
LEGISLATURE OF WHAT EXISTS
CURRENTLY ON THE CODE VERSUS
WHAT THE CLIMATE ACTION
COMMUNITY PLAN IS.
SO THE FACT THAT WE ARE TRYING
TO ADDRESS WHAT WE PRETTY MUCH
SEE AND TRY TO NAVIGATE HERE
EVERY TUESDAY IS IMPORTANT.
SO I THINK WE&apos;RE MOVING FORWARD
IN A GOOD WAY AND THIS IS AIMED
SQUARELY AT REALLY REDUCING
UNCERTAINTY ABOUT EXPECTATIONS
OF ELECTRIFICATION.
SO I THINK THAT&apos;S IMPORTANT.
I THINK WE&apos;RE ALSO
SIMULTANEOUSLY BALANCING
TENSIONS BETWEEN, YOU KNOW,
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
OF ADDITIONAL HOUSING AND
BUILDINGS AND DEVELOPMENT
RELATIVE TO ENVIRONMENTAL
SUSTAINABILITY.
AGAIN, NOT AN EASY BALANCE TO
STRIKE BUT ONE THAT WE NEED TO
GRAPPLE WITH I THINK
RESPONSIBLY SO SOME OF THE
THOUGHTS I HAD KIND OF LEADING
INTO THIS AND I LIKE THE
THERE&apos;S THE SEPARATION OF USE
AS WE KIND OF TALKED AND FIRST
ACTUALLY LET ME JUST KIND
OF BACK UP AND GIVE A LITTLE
CLARITY TO WHAT COMMISSIONER
MILLS WAS TALKING ABOUT WITH
RESPECT TO REALLY FOR ME IT&apos;S
GRID RESILIENCE IS IS A HUGE
CONCERN OF MINE.
RIGHT?
I MEAN OVER NEAR MILLER WE&apos;VE
SEEN THOSE POWER OUTAGES GO FOR
DAYS AT A TIME.
SO I WANT TO MAKE SURE GRID
RESILIENCE IS THERE WHETHER
IT&apos;S A GAS FIRED BACKUP OR A
BATTERY PLAN OR A DISTRIBUTED
GRID THAT MAYBE THE CLIMATE
MILITARY CAN HELP EFFECTUATE
GRID RESILIENCE AND LIFE SAFETY
IS PREDOMINANTLY ONE OF MY
CONCERNS KIND GOING INTO THIS
JUST MAKING SURE THAT WE HAVE
REDUNDANCIES THAT CAN KEEP
PEOPLE WARM RELATIVE TO AGAIN I
UNDERSTAND AGAIN HAVING
ITEMIZERS AND MAKE UP FOR THERE
THROUGHOUT THE SYSTEM.
&gt;&gt; ALL OF THAT BEING SAID AGAIN
GRID RESILIENCE IS A CONCERN
OF MINE SEPARATION OF USES.
SO I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT I THINK ABOUT WHEN
ADDRESSING THIS IS THE SCALE
OF A PROJECT AND THEN ALSO THE
KIND OF USE IS REQUIRED SO A
LABORATORY A RESTAURANT HAS
DIFFERENT THERMAL REQUIREMENTS
THAN HOMES.
SO I THINK THAT LOOKING AT IT
BY A USE CASE WOULD BE MORE
AMICABLE LIKE FOR EXAMPLE,
HOTELS, HOTELS, RESTAURANTS,
LABS THOSE ARE SOME OF THE USES
THAT KIND OF COME TO MIND.
SO AS WELL AS THE SCALE OF A
PROJECT.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
TWENTY FOUR UNITS RELATIVE TO
500 DIFFERENT PERFORMERS,
DIFFERENT KINDS SHARED WALLS
REQUIREMENTS THAT GO INTO IT SO
THOSE ARE THE KINDS OF THINGS
THAT I THINK AGAIN THIS IS VERY
IMPORTANT FOR US TO ADDRESS
BECAUSE IT OFTEN COMES TO THIS
TABLE WE ASKED PETITIONERS HAVE
YOU TRIED THINKING ABOUT THIS
OR CODIFYING THIS?
DOES BRING CLARITY AND THAT IS
IMPORTANT.
THAT IS OUR JOB TO DO THAT.
SO I THINK THAT WE NEED IN MY
MIND THIS IS IMPORTANT FOR US
TO TACKLE.
IT IS IMPORTANT FOR US TO DO
ADDITIONAL RESEARCH.
I SUPPORT POSTPONEMENT ON THIS
ONE.
THAT BEING SAID, THIS IS A VERY
NECESSARY TOPIC FOR US TO BRING
CLARITY TO THE COMMUNITY FOR.
SO AGAIN IN MY MIND THE
SEPARATION OF USES SCALE ARE
TWO THINGS THAT WE SHOULD THINK
ABOUT AS WELL AS THE CONCEPTUAL
AND REALLY FROM THE STANDPOINT
OF ALSO THIS SEEMS LIKE A I
DON&apos;T KNOW WHAT THE RIGHT WORD
IS HERE BUT THERE COULD BE
ADDITIONAL THOUGHTS OR
CONTEMPLATIONS GIVEN TO
CREATING AN INCENTIVE
STRUCTURES FOR THIS.
SO THINK ABOUT TAX INCREMENT
FINANCING OR SALES TAX
FINANCING THINGS OF THAT NATURE
AND SPECIFIC INSTRUMENTS THAT
COULD BE BROUGHT TO INCENTIVIZE
US FURTHER.
&gt;&gt; SO I&apos;M I&apos;M LOOKING FORWARD
TO HAVING THIS DISCUSSION.
&gt;&gt; I SUPPORT POSTPONEMENT AT
THIS TIME.
THANK YOU.
ANYBODY ELSE?
I JUST HAVE ONE COMMENT AND
SOMETHING TO MAYBE THINK ABOUT
THAT IS NOT NECESSARILY PART
OF THE ORDINANCE.
BUT I THINK AS WE&apos;VE HAD THE
OPPORTUNITY TO PARTICIPATE IN A
COUPLE OF THESE WEBINARS THAT
HAVE BEEN REALLY HELPFUL
RESOURCES FOR ME AS I&apos;VE BEEN
LEARNING MORE AND MORE FROM THE
KIND OF ARCHITECTURE
PERSPECTIVE OF HOW YOU DESIGN
THESE BUILDINGS IS THAT YOU
SEEM TO BE REALLY FLIPPING A
PROCESS FOR DESIGN IN TERMS
OF HOW YOU THINK ABOUT THESE
BUILDINGS AND THAT WE&apos;RE ASKING
PEOPLE TO KIND OF SWITCH THINGS
REALLY LATE IN THE PROCESS AND
THAT WHAT I&apos;VE LEARNED IS THAT
YOU START THINKING ABOUT YOUR
ENERGY SYSTEMS REALLY EARLY IN
THE PROCESS WHICH IS NOT WHAT
TYPICALLY HAPPENS.
AND SO I DON&apos;T THINK ABOUT
ABOUT IT AS PART OF THE
CODE BUT MAYBE THAT THERE&apos;S
SOME SORT OF WAY FOR US TO
PROVIDE RESOURCES FOR PEOPLE
BECAUSE SOME OF THE WEBINARS
THAT I&apos;VE SEEN HAVE BEEN REALLY
HELPFUL JUST TO KIND OF ORIENT
HOW ARCHITECTS AND SITE
DESIGNERS AND EVERYTHING THAT
WE MIGHT THINK DIFFERENTLY
ABOUT THE DESIGN PROCESS ITSELF
BECAUSE IT DOESN&apos;T HAVE TO BE
MORE IT CAN BE A LOT LESS
ENERGY INTENSIVE IF YOU CAN
DESIGN IT RIGHT FROM THE GET GO
IN TERMS OF HOW TIGHT THE THE
BUILDING ENVELOPE IS AND HOW
YOUR INCORPORATING ENERGY
CREATION SYSTEMS FROM SOLAR OR
WIND OR GEOTHERMAL OR WHATEVER
IT IS SO I GUESS CREATING A
SYSTEM THAT ALLOWS PEOPLE TO BE
ABLE TO LEARN AND HAVE
RESOURCES TO THAT AREN&apos;T PART
OF THE CODE BUT ARE THAT ARE
JUST PART OF A SYSTEM
OF SUPPORT TO BE ABLE TO ENABLE
DEVELOPERS AND DESIGNERS TO BE
ABLE TO TO MOVE FORWARD WITHOUT
JUST KIND OF SLAPPING ON AT THE
END BUT REALLY THINKING ABOUT
HOW YOU MAY REORIENT YOUR WHOLE
PROCESS FROM THE BEGINNING
BECAUSE THAT THAT WAS VERY
CLEAR TO ME THROUGHOUT ALL
OF THOSE WEBINARS IS THAT IT&apos;S
JUST A DIFFERENT WAY OF OF
DESIGNING AND THAT YOU&apos;RE
RUNNING YOUR ENERGY MODEL AT
THE BEGINNING AT THE END AND
YOU&apos;RE THINKING ABOUT WINDOWS
AND THERMAL ENVELOPES AND
THINGS LIKE THAT.
&gt;&gt; IT REALLY CHANGES SO AGAIN,
NOT NECESSARILY PART OF THE
CODE ITSELF BUT JUST A PART
OF SUPPORTING STRUCTURES TO BE
ABLE TO MAKE IT SO THAT PEOPLE
HAVE THE CHANCE TO BE
SUCCESSFUL.
I GUESS THAT&apos;S WHAT MY TWO
CENTS WOULD BE ON THAT.
ANY OTHER COMMENTS,
COMMISSIONER?
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M CURIOUS IF FROM STAFFS
PERSPECTIVE OR FROM OTHER
PLANNING COMMISSIONERS GIVEN
THAT THERE ARE MORE QUESTIONS
ABOUT ELECTRIFICATION?
I DON&apos;T WANT SOLAR TO LINGER
TOO LONG LIKE HOW WOULD STAFF
FEEL LIKE DO WOULD YOU STILL
RECOMMEND POSTPONEMENT ON THAT
FOR FURTHER ENGAGEMENT OR DO
YOU FEEL COMFORTABLE MOVING
THAT FORWARD TONIGHT OR YEAH
TONIGHT I GUESS SO
TO BE CLEAR
THAT LANGUAGE WASN&apos;T PUBLISHED
UNTIL LATE LAST WEEK SO I GUESS
I WOULD STILL RECOMMEND THAT WE
POSTPONE THAT TO THE 6TH.
HOWEVER, I AM HEARING A LOT
DIFFERENT LEVEL OF CONVERSATION
ABOUT THESE TWO ORDINANCES.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I
WOULD PROPOSE IS WHEN THIS COME
THEY COME BACK TO SIX WE SPLIT
THEM SO THAT IF THE COMMISSION
IS OF THE MIND TO TAKE ACTION
MORE QUICKLY AND ONE THAN THE
OTHER AS I&apos;M TAKING A FEW MORE
NOTES THE ELECTRIFICATION I
OF COURSE I HOPE IS TO BE ABLE
TO SUCCESSFULLY ANSWER ALL
THESE QUESTIONS BUT I THINK
THAT THERE MIGHT BE MORE
CONVERSATIONS ABOUT
ELECTRIFICATION REGARDLESS SO
SO A LONG WAY OF SAYING MY
RECOMMENDATIONS STILL WOULD BE
TO POSTPONE BOTH.
BUT WHEN THEY COME BACK MY
INTENTION WOULD BE THEN TO
SPLIT THEM AND THEN THE
COMMISSION COULD CONSIDER THESE
INDEPENDENTLY AND THEN THEY
WOULD PROGRESS TO THE CITY
COUNCIL INDEPENDENTLY AS WELL.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER
WHITE, IT&apos;S JUST A QUICK
QUESTION ABOUT PUBLIC HEARINGS
.
DOES DOES THIS GET NOTICED AS A
PUBLIC HEARING?
&gt;&gt; TEXT AMENDMENTS ARE NOTICED
AND WATCHING ALL THE NEWS AND
THEY&apos;RE SENT TO OUR GOVDELIVERY
WHICH IS ABOUT TWO THOUSAND
EMAIL ADDRESSES AND A
NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION BUT
THERE&apos;S NOT A MAILING
ASSOCIATED WITH A TEXT
AMENDMENT EVEN THOUGH IT&apos;S A
CITYWIDE CHANGE.
&gt;&gt; CORRECT.
OK, SO WHEN WE BRING THIS BACK
HYPOTHETICALLY WE BRING THIS
BACK ON DECEMBER 6TH.
IT WILL HAVE BEEN NOTICED PRIOR
TO THAT THERE WOULD BE A PUBLIC
HEARING AND THEN WE WOULD DO
OUR VOTE AND DEPENDING ON ITS
APPROVAL IT WOULD GO FORWARD TO
A COUNCIL WHERE IT WOULD HAVE
TWO READINGS FIRST READING A
PUBLIC HEARING, A SECOND
READING AND A PUBLIC HEARING
AND THEN A FINAL VOTE.
&gt;&gt; YES, BUT A CLARIFICATION.
IT WAS ALREADY NOTICED,
HOWEVER, IT&apos;S NOTICED BY TITLE
AND THE TEXT WAS FINALIZED LAST
WEEK.
I THINK THAT WARRANTS MORE TIME
FOR THOSE THAT ARE INTERESTED.
WE WILL NOT BE NOTICING WE&apos;VE
NOTICED BOTH OF THESE
ORDINANCES FOR THIS PUBLIC
HEARING.
ANYBODY WHO IS INTERESTED IN IT
HAD THE OPPORTUNITY TO COME IF
YOU CHOOSE TO POSTPONE IT TO
DECEMBER 6TH.
THOSE THAT WE&apos;VE NOTIFIED ARE
AWARE OF THAT AND ABLE TO TRACK
IT.
THE PUBLIC HEARING WILL
CONTINUE DECEMBER SIX BUT THERE
WOULDN&apos;T BE ADDITIONAL
NOTIFICATION ON IT.
&gt;&gt; OK, SO I WAS CONFUSED
BECAUSE PART OF YOUR REASON FOR
POSTPONING WAS THE IT FELT LIKE
IT WAS THE NOTICING THAT THE
LANGUAGE WASN&apos;T FINALIZED SO
MAYBE I WAS CONFLATING THE
NOTICE THAT WE&apos;RE GOING TO HAVE
CONVERSATION AND THE THE FINAL
LANGUAGE OF WHAT THAT
CONVERSATION WAS AS ONE THING
AND YOU&apos;RE NOW SEPARATING THEM
TO SAY NO, THE NOTICE IS IT WAS
DONE.
IT WAS PROPER.
IT WON&apos;T BE READ NOTICE BUT
WE&apos;RE ASKING FOR A POSTPONEMENT
BECAUSE WE WANT TO GIVE THE
PUBLIC MORE STAKEHOLDERS MORE
OPPORTUNITY TO PROVIDE COMMENTS
TO PLANNING BEFORE WE FINALIZE
OUR VOTE.
YES AND SPECIFICALLY THREE
WEEKS AGO WE NOTICED THE
SPECIFIC ELECTRIFICATION
LANGUAGE THAT&apos;S BEEN PRESENT
THREE WEEKS AGO WE NOTIFIED THE
PUBLIC THAT WE ANTICIPATE
PROPOSED CHANGES TO SOLAR
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES MAKING IT
MORE FLEXIBLE.
THE DETAILS OF THAT WERE NOT
PUBLISHED UNTIL LAST WEEK AND
SO THERE COULD BE THOSE THAT
SAW THAT WE&apos;RE WAITING TO SEE
THIS LANGUAGE AND THE TIME
FRAME FROM SHARE IT BEING
SHARED WITH THE PUBLIC AND USE
THE COMMISSION.
THAT&apos;S MY RATIONALE IS THAT
EVEN THOUGH WE WON&apos;T BE SENDING
IT OUT TO ANYONE NOTICE JUST
SOME MORE SPACE FOR
STAKEHOLDERS, THE PUBLIC AND
THE COMMISSIONERS TO SIT WITH
IT BEFORE TAKING ACTION AND AND
SO THEN A FOLLOW ON QUESTION IS
IF WE&apos;RE USING THE GOV
DELIVERY, IS THERE IS THERE A
WAY FOR US TO NOTIFY THOSE THAT
ARE SUBSCRIBED THAT THE THIS IS
THIS WAS POSTPONED?
HERE&apos;S A FINAL LANGUAGE AND
THEN WE&apos;RE GOING TO HAVE IT&apos;S
GOING TO BE BACK ON THE AGENDA
FOR THE SIX I KNOW YOU PUBLISH
WHAT&apos;S ON THE AGENDA FOR A SIX
BUT I&apos;M JUST TRYING TO NOTE
THAT THERE WAS A CHANGE TO DO.
IT IS THAT&apos;S SOMETHING WE CAN
DO.
I THINK THE EFFECT WOULD BE
SIMILAR.
IT WOULD OK.
YEAH.
ALL RIGHT.
OK.
CAN I HAVE A MOTION TO POSTPONE
BY COMMISSIONER SAUVé SECONDED
BY COMMISSIONER DO WE DO A WE
DON&apos;T NEED TO DO A ROLL CALL
FOR THIS JUST OK ALL AND ALL IN
FAVOR ALL IN FAVOR
OF POSTPONEMENT OK MOTION
CARRIES ALL RIGHTY WE ARE ON TO
PUBLIC COMMENT ITEM NUMBER NINE
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PERSONS TO SPEAK UP TO THREE
MINUTES ABOUT ANY ISSUE THAT IS
ON THE PUBLIC HEARING WILL
FIRST CALL INDIVIDUALS PRESENT
TO THE COMMISSION AND THEN
REMOTE PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK
DURING THIS PUBLIC HEARING
REMOTELY PRESS STAR NINE ARE
USED TO RAISE HAND FEATURE FOR
PHONE ACCESS CALL EIGHT SEVEN
SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO
FOUR SEVEN AND THEN ARE MEETING
IN NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX
THREE FOUR ONE TWO TO SIX TO
UNMUTED PLUS PRESS STAR SIX
CITY STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS
THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR HAND
USING THE LAST THREE DIGITS
OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR BY NAME
IF AVAILABLE FOR THOSE
ACCESSING THE WEB WEBLINK
YOU&apos;LL HEAR IN ORDER TO MAKE AN
ANNOUNCEMENT THE HOST IS
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK FOR
EITHER METHOD OF PARTICIPATION.
&gt;&gt; PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENT.
IS THERE ANYBODY PRESENT THAT
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
TIME
?
THANK YOU FOR YOUR BRANDELL ME
AGAIN.
I KNOW IT&apos;S INCIDENTAL AND THIS
IS NOT A CENTRAL ISSUE BUT I
HAVE DONE THE CALCULATION ON
THE RELATIVE GREENHOUSE GAS
IMPACT OF GOING ELECTRIC FOR
GOING WITH GAS EVEN WITH TIKI&apos;S
CURRENT FUEL MIX ON THE CITY
OUTSIDE CALCULATOR CONVERSION
FACTOR THAT TAKES INTO ACCOUNT
THAT FUEL MIX AS IT CURRENTLY
STANDS WHICH IS A VERY DIRTY
MIX OF COAL AND NATURAL GAS AND
A LITTLE BIT OF RENEWABLES AND
NUCLEAR.
BUT EVEN WITH THAT IF YOU ARE
STILL BY MY CALCULATION FIFTY
PERCENT CLEANER BY GOING
ELECTRIC THEN GOING WITH GAS TO
GENERATE AN EQUIVALENT AMOUNT
OF HEAT FOR RESIDENTIAL THAT
HAS A LOT TO DO WITH THE FACT
THAT THERE ARE UPSTREAM METHANE
EMISSIONS WITH NATURAL GAS
CONSUMPTION AND ALSO A LOT
OF CO2 THAT&apos;S CONSUMED IN THE
FRACKING PROCESS AND THE
STUDIES ARE OUT THERE.
YOU KNOW, I SEE THEM IN THE
COURSE OF MY WORK AND IF YOU
INCLUDE ALL THOSE FACTORS EVEN
NOW YOU&apos;RE STILL 50 PERCENT
CLEANER GOING WITH ELECTRIC
WITH HEAT PUMPS AS OPPOSED TO
GAS FURNACES AND THAT&apos;S AS YOU
HAVE POINTED OUT THAT&apos;S ONLY
GOING TO GET MORE AND MORE IT&apos;S
GOING TO GET BETTER AND BETTER
AS DTT GRADUALLY ALTHOUGH NOT
QUICK ENOUGH RETIRES.
IT&apos;S COAL PLANTS AND AS
RENEWABLES.
SO IT&apos;S A NO BRAINER TO ME TO
TO DO IT AGAIN.
I KNOW THAT&apos;S NOT A THAT&apos;S NOT
AN ISSUE THAT YOU&apos;RE WORRIED
ABOUT.
YOU&apos;RE THINKING TOWARDS THE
FUTURE WHICH IS COMPLETELY
APPROPRIATE BUT EVEN IN THE
PRESENT THIS IS THE WAY TO GO.
I&apos;M VERY GRATEFUL TO THE STAFF
AND TO THE WHOLE COMMISSION FOR
TAKING THIS THIS ISSUE.
IT&apos;S TO YOUR GREAT CREDIT THAT
,YOU KNOW, YOU&apos;RE BREAKING NEW
GROUND ON THIS AT EASTERN
MICHIGAN AND IT&apos;S TREMENDOUSLY
GRATIFYING AND EXCITING FROM MY
POINT OF VIEW.
SO YOU KNOW, WHAT CAN I SAY?
I REALLY COMMEND ALL OF YOU FOR
GOING IN THIS DIRECTION.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OR ANYBODY ELSE PRESENT THAT
WOULD LIKE TO ADDRESS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION.
ANYBODY IN THE QUEUE VIRTUALLY
JUST GIVE IT A FEW MOMENTS
.
NOPE.
OK, ITEM NUMBER TEN COMMISSION
PROPOSED BUSINESS COMMISSIONER
OR ELSE I&apos;D LIKE TO PROPOSE
THAT MR LEONARD, IF YOU COULD
ADD ON TO THE BOTTOM OF THE
WORK PLAN FOR THE SCHOOLS.
I&apos;M ALL OUT OF NOTETAKING PAPER
.
I CAN TEAR OFF THE CORNER OF MY
PAPER WHERE I&apos;VE PUT SOME TWO
STARS NEXT TO THINGS THE NEXT
TIME WE LOOK AT THE WORK PLAN
TO SEE WHERE MODIFICATIONS TO
CONFLICTING AND YOU SPOTFIRE
FALL IN OUR PRIORITIES AND THIS
IS PROBABLY A LONGER ONE AND I
DEFER TO YOU WHETHER THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WILL TAKE UP
OR NOT BUT THE CALCULATION
OF DENSITY BY BEDROOM RAFAAT
VERSUS BY UNITS WOULD BE I
THINK HELP GET AWAY FROM THE
SIX BEDROOM UNITS ALL THE TIME.
BUT WE CAN TALK ABOUT
PRIORITIES LATER.
THANK YOU.
MALES.
WE ARE ON A GERMAN MOTION TO
ADJOURN COMMISSIONER MARCH
SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER DISH
ALL IN FAVOR BY WE ARE
ADJOURNED